A bank card, bankkort, can be used like a cash dispenser card, but can also be used for payments.
A basic degree requires at least two years of study and usually more.
A broad spectrum of religions from every part of the globe is represented here.
A cash dispenser card, uttagskort, is linked to a bank account and is used only to withdraw money from cash dispensers.
A civil case is initiated when one party files a complaint against the other party.
A concept you will often see when shopping for food is the best before date, bäst-före-datum.
A couple of weeks before the election, everyone who is entitled to vote receives an elector’s registration card, röstkort, in the mail.
A criminal case is a trial of one or more people who are suspected of having broken a law.
A debit card, betalkort, is also used for payments.
A democracy should reflect the composition and opinion of its citizens, shouldn’t it?
A democracy that wants to base its sense of community on ideas of human difference and cultural diversity cannot exact the same demands.
A fair economic world order, refugee policy based on solidarity and efforts to combat racism.
A few decades ago, students had to address their teachers as Sir or Miss if they wanted their attention.
A few important rules govern the operations of municipalities.
A foreign national convicted of a serious crime may be sentenced to deportation from Sweden, even if he or she holds a residence permit and has a family here.
243 A fresh start in Sweden An introduction for new arrivals
A good knowledge of one’s native language has been shown to be an important basis both for learning Swedish and succeeding with other subjects.
A good way to get to know Sweden and the Swedes is to learn the language as quickly as possible.
A huge icecap spread out over much of the northern part of the globe and did not begin to melt until approximately 15,000 years ago.
A list of programmes with nation-wide recruiting areas and where they are located can be found on the website of the National Agency for Education, Skolverket.
A list of religious communities active in Sweden can be found in an appendix at the end of the book.
A local parish office is known as a pastorsexpedition.
A lot of things will surprise you and even make you sad.
A more reliable method is to contact a maternity clinic, mödravården, and ask them to do the test instead.
A multicultural exchange is the result.
A municipality can establish specially designed programmes, specialutformade program, which are non-national.
A municipality’s range of culture and leisure offerings is often coordinated by a joint political committee.
A person sentenced to probation is assigned a probation officer, övervakare, who is charged with keeping in touch with the offender.
A personal identification number, an ID card and a census registration certificate are some of the papers you will need in Sweden.
A physician must sign the death certificate.
A popular non-Christian tradition of Easter witches, påskkärringar, is also associated with Maundy Thursday.
A real-estate agent can also help the buyer find a surveyor, besiktningsman, a person who is an expert on buildings and can check the house or flat before the purchase goes through.
A recreation centre is often associated with a school.
A relatively new tradition is for people to place small candle lamps on graves, and on All Hallows Eve hundreds of lights now flicker in the graveyards.
140 A safe place for children Day nurseries, open pre-schools and recreation centres
146 A school for all Nine-year compulsory school and upper-secondary school
a school that is safe and stimulating for both teachers and students, consideration for others, compassion, good order and structure.
A semla is a plain wheat bun that has been sliced open and filled with marzipan and cream.
A series of land reforms were implemented, and old villages were divided up so that farms came to be widely separated.
A society based on ecocycles; renewable energy sources instead of nuclear power.
A society based on ethnic and cultural diversity is actually a revolutionary commitment for a country like Sweden, and indeed for all democracies which more or less explicitly base their community of welfare on ideas of historical and cultural affinity.
A special law – the Act on Consensual Unions – is applicable to such relationships.
A Swedish author, August Strindberg, once wrote: It is not in our virtues but in our faults that our humanity resides.
A temporary parents’ allowance, tillfällig föräldrapenning, is available to parents to care for a child under 12 when the child, or the person who normally looks after for the child, is sick, or when they need to go to the child healthcare centre, barnavårdscentralen.
A third way of attaining basic eligibility is through work.
A traditional crayfish party, is lit by colourful paper lanterns, and party-goers wear little party hats while they eat.
A variety of sports associations are active in most municipalities, including gymnastics and exercise clubs, riding clubs, orienteering clubs, ski clubs (at least in the northern parts of the country, where there is snow throughout the winter) and many others.
A variety of types of ceremonies may be performed, but certain regulations pertaining to deaths must be followed.
A visa valid in another EU country that is a signatory to the Schengen Agreement is also valid in Sweden.
A week after Christmas is the New Year, and the cycle begins again.
A wide range of discount tickets is available that can cut the cost of your trip – ask at a railway station, bus station or travel agency, or check on the Internet.
A wide range of higher education alternatives is available to those who have completed upper-secondary school.
A woman who is being beaten by her spouse can seek protection at a women’s shelter, kvinnojour – see the chapter entitled To your health.
A year of almost indescribable degradation was over.
About a diminishment of oneself and one’s human dignity.
About being pushed to the very edge of the acceptable and the moral.
About scrounging for food like a stray dog, living in darkness like a rat, drinking water from the radiator and being happy that there is any water at all.
About three months before it is time to renew your permit certificate, the Migration Board will send you a letter with instructions on what to do.
Absolutely mad, that’s how.
According to church tradition, Midsummer is celebrated in memory of John the Baptist, and there is a name day for Johannes (John) in conjunction with the weekend.
Adult children help their parents, and the elderly often help one another.
Adults can receive counselling on such matters at maternity clinics, mödrahälsovården, or women’s healthcare centres, kvinnohälsan, or at the nearest general healthcare centre.
Adults have big celebrations for even birthdays – 30, 40 and 50 years – and for older people, major celebrations are also held on 75th, 85th and 95th birthdays.
Advent is a time of Christmas preparations.
After a few days, someone said I had to report to the police, apply for asylum, try to get a residence permit.
After a week or two, you will receive a document in the mail containing your personal identification number.
After a year in the dark, the fact that the streetlight was shining made me feel safe.
After all, they know their children best.
After going through the programme of instruction, the young person may also opt not to be confirmed.
After ten years, I began to understand the social code.
After that, you must get a Swedish driving licence.
After the trial, the court determines whether the defendant should be punished.
After this initial house call, parents take their child to the healthcare centre themselves for developmental checks.
All are dressed in long white shirts.
All cars must have their lights on, even during the day.
All children should feel secure and be able to develop on the basis of their own particular talents.
All compulsory schools follow a common curriculum, läroplan, which describes what students must learn.
All contacts with the family counselling service are voluntary.
All dentists are required to keep a list of prices at their office so you can see what it will cost for a check-up or filling.
All hospitals, most healthcare centres and many private gynaecologists can carry out HIV tests.
All in all, this means that almost one in five residents of Sweden has a foreign background.
All maternity wards provide pain relief.
All of these are generally grouped under the heading of social welfare, välfärd, and are funded by all residents of Sweden through taxes and fees.
All people should have the same opportunity to take responsibility and make the most of their opportunities, regardless of their background.
All such requests must be made in writing.
All the display windows were lit up.
All travellers coming from Sweden must therefore have a passport.
Almost everyone is friendly and helpful.
Almost 99 per cent of all children between the ages of 7 and 16 attend ordinary nine-year compulsory schools.
Almost 200,000 Swedish residents were born in Finland.
Almost two thirds of all employed persons work in private companies large and small.
Although many films are made in Sweden, foreign films, especially American, account for most cinematic fare.
Although they complain about high taxes, however, most Swedes want to preserve the things their taxes finance: healthcare and the basic economic security that mean that no-one in the country need be truly badly off.
Ambulances are usually reserved for very serious cases – an example would be a situation in which the patient needs heart treatment during the transport.
Among refugees granted residence permits, the most common countries of origin during the nineties were Bosnia, Kosovo, Turkey, Iraq and Somalia.
Among the best known are the Salvation Army, Frälsningsarmén, the Pentecostal Movement, Pingströrelsen, and the Swedish Missionary Society.
Among the other lost strangers on Drottninggatan, we looked like two strangers graced with a direction, a goal, a meaning.
AMS vocational training courses for the unemployed, Arbetsmarknadsutbildning, are designed to provide participants with new expertise and thus a better chance of getting a job.
An apology, a shameful expression, a turning away of the head.
An appeal is a request to retry the case in a higher court.
An Employment Office staff member and the jobseeker together work out a plan of action, handlingsplan, considering what would be best for the individual in question.
An HIV test is an ordinary blood test.
An ordinary question with some extraordinary answers
And in the end, maybe you, like I, will come to love Sweden and the people who live here.
And it is etched in letters of fire on my neighbour’s outraged visage.
And just as it was a hundred years ago, it is up to us today to see that the new country is a good one in which to live.
And my sister is crying.
And now here she was, face to face with a full-blown savage with his curls teased up in an enormous do.
And sometimes they are – discrimination against people from other countries exists; it is not uncommon.
And that’s why the children dress up the way they do.
And there are many who feel equally at home in both countries.
And we didn’t sentimentalise it.
“And what is this?” he asks with burning fury.
And what will she do?
And which thus, more or less explicitly, have demanded cultural adaptation and uniformity.
Another factor that has also greatly affected Sweden in recent years is the increasingly international mobility of people, goods, services and money.
Another famous Swedish king is Charles XII, who incites strong feelings in Sweden even today.
Another important rule is that everyone living in a municipality must be treated equally, provided that the same conditions prevail locally.
Another is the Market Court, Marknadsdomstolen, which deals with issues involving the responsibility of companies for their services and products.
Another law required that all children should attend school and that public schooling should be free of charge.
Another option is to join the Alfa unemployment benefit fund.
Another very special late-summer culinary tradition is the surströmming party.
Another way of buying things is by mail order, postorder.
Another way of talking about the same difference is to speak of “right” and “left”.
Answers to many questions can be found in this pocket guide – a quick orientation in Swedish society.
Anyone who has ever lived in a Swedish rental flat knows where the final judgement will be handed down in the laundry room.
Anyone who is a citizen of or holds a residence permit in any of the countries that have signed the Schengen Agreement may travel within the Schengen area for up to three months without a passport or visa.
Appeals must be submitted in writing to the Migration Board in Norrköping within three weeks of notice of the decision.
Application forms are available from the county administrative board.
Applications for a housing allowance should be sent in to the Insurance Office.
Approximately 30 kronor out of every hundred kronor earned goes to municipal tax.
Approximately 20,000 people belong to the Evangelical National Missionary Society , Evangeliska Fosterlandsstiftelsen (EFS), an independent organisation within the Church of Sweden.
Are your grades good enough to get you into a university?
Around that time, birch twigs decorated with coloured feathers are sold.
Art, music, theatre, film, dance and literature are always considered culture, but many of the things we do ourselves are culture, too.
As a resident of a municipality, you will thus often come into contact with its various departments.
As a result of this loss, Finland, long the eastern part of Sweden, had to be turned over to Russia.
As I walked from the aircraft to passport control, I wondered if other people would ever dare look me in the eye.
As in other countries, Sweden’s national theatres are situated in the capital city.
As in the schools, democratic values, demokratiska värderingar, constitute the foundation of the child care system.
As long as it has been spoken, the Swedish language has incorporated words and expressions from other languages.
As of this writing, benefits are payable for 300 days.
As the twentieth century drew to a close, Sweden started to be affected by the rest of the world more than ever before.
As the Viking Era approached its end, a new religion came to Sweden: Christianity.
Ascension Day, Kristi himmelsfärdsdag, always falls on a Thursday.
Ask the tax authority what rules apply in your particular case.
Ask your insurance company representative exactly what your home insurance covers and does not cover.
Assault is against the law, and that holds true within the family, too.
At any time during the school year, you can contact the school administration or teachers to supply information or discuss matters of importance.
At BRIS, you can ask for advice and remain anonymous.
At every school there is usually a school nurse, skolsköterska, who weighs and measures the children and carries out hearing and eye tests.
At last, peace had come to the country after the many wars.
At many Christmas parties, people dance around the tree and sing traditional carols.
At many places of work, the Friday after Ascension Day is a day off.
At most libraries, you can also borrow books on tape, video films and CDs.
At most pre-schools, the children help set and clear the table, and a couple of children at a time can help prepare the food.
At some pre-schools, a language other than Swedish is spoken; some childminders know other languages, too.
At some schools, whole classes receive instruction in a language other than Swedish, and other schools provide instruction only in certain languages.
At that point, if you do not pay within 10 days, the debt enforcement service collects the money by garnishing your wages or by seizing your car or some other valuable as compensation for the debt.
At that time, several important agreements were established between employers and the labour unions.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the great majority of Swedes still lived in the countryside as farmers.
At the Employment Office, there are computers on which you can search their material and the Internet.
At the end of October and beginning of November falls All Hallows Day, Alla helgons dag, when thoughts turn to departed relatives and friends.
At the same time, the church’s Catholic teachings were replaced by the Protestant, Lutheran creed.
At this time, Sweden had nowhere near as many inhabitants as it does today.
Bad to smoke, bad to swear.
Battered women can seek help and advice from women’s crisis centres, kvinnojourerna, or from a special emergency telephone service for women with a native language other than Swedish.
Be sure to get a receipt for the trip, and show it to the physician.
Because now I know what they are: never just tell it like it is; never contradict anyone, even in a debate; never try to show that you are better than anyone else So the job ahead of you is a tough one.
Because shells break streetlights.
Because the one that’s on target doesn’t make a sound.
Before each term, the associations publish course catalogues and advertise in the daily press.
Besides paying the basic allowance, as mentioned above, the Alfa unemployment benefit fund is the only one you can join regardless of your union and profession.
Besides the municipal council, municipal politicians are organised in other, smaller groups that hold meetings of their own.
Between council meetings, a smaller group known as the municipal executive board, kommunstyrelsen, has political responsibility.
Between the autumn and spring comes the Christmas holiday, and there is a summer holiday between school years.
Bicycle helmet on, seatbelt fastened.
Birthdays are more important.
Both academic and vocational programmes are available.
Both adults and young people attend folk high schools.
Both are available in many vocational categories – industry, commerce, construction, etc.
Both are equally entitled to the family’s joint assets.
Both have offices at many locations in Sweden.
Both of us had our reasons.
Both popular movements and interest groups use lobbying in their efforts to influence politicians to make decisions that benefit their members.
Both pre-schools and family day nurseries try to adapt their hours of opening to meet the needs of parents and children.
Both screening procedures are risk-free and painless.
Both Shiite and Sunni Muslims live here.
Bring a document indicating your personal identification number, a photograph and a census registration certificate for ID.
BRIS’s website can be found at www.bris.se.
Bronze is an easily worked alloy of several metals, and could be shaped into axes, spears, swords and jewellery.
Business or pleasure?
But as often as not, it’s a question of rules.
But Christmas is not quite over.
But don’t worry – most of the time, it’s actually good fun Make a game of observing the Swedish way of doing things.
But forests, meadows and waterways may be freely enjoyed by all.
But I ate all the time.
But I know these are no more than excuses and evasions.
But in many housing areas, the laundry room is the only place where neighbours see one another.
But it does mean that we have no alternative but to get down to work.
But most people have one very positive quality: they really do want things to work out for the best.
But my path to loving Sweden has not always been an easy one.
But not dead on.
But of course she didn’t do it.
But the king needed money to defend the country.
But the moral code of the laundry room has deep roots in most religions:
But the words were coming from another world.
But there are also important differences, especially regarding the distribution of property in the event of a divorce.
But working “black” is risky.
By autumn, the tax authorities have checked all the returns and send out tax assessments.
By comparison with other countries, drunk driving and drug offences are dealt with severely in Sweden.
By joining a union, you also become a member of its unemployment benefit fund.
By law, ordinary working hours may encompass a maximum of 40 hours per week.
By this time, the church had grown very powerful, owning a fifth of all the land in the country.
By voting in the municipal election, you affect both the local tax rate and the level of service the municipality provides to its residents.
Calendars of events, evenemangskalendrar, are usually published in daily newspapers or special brochures.
Call and ask for an appointment at least one month in advance.
Can you get a loan to get started?
Can your aged father come to Sweden too?
Another important document is a census registration certificate, which you need to get an ID card, ID-kort*, extended residence permit or passport.
Certain adult education associations, studieförbund*, such as Folkuniversitetet, also offer upper-secondary programmes.
Certain benefits paid from the Insurance Office, such as parents’ allowance and sickness benefits, are considered income for these purposes and are also taxed.
Certain classes may send out monthly newsletters and special notices before events such as parents’ meetings.
Certain hospital wards also have open clinics, which you may visit without a referral from a healthcare centre.
Certain other rules – on age restrictions, for example – may apply to non-Swedish citizens.
Check the Pink Pages of the telephone directory to see if there is a local chapter where you live; otherwise, you can contact the national organisation in Stockholm – see Good to know.
Check the Yellow Pages under trafikskolor.
Child allowance Parents receive a child allowance, barnbidrag, for children up to 16 years of age.
Child allowances are paid monthly and you do not need to apply.
Child care for schoolchildren is available both before and after the pre-school class for children who need it.
Child care is also available for older children attending school.
Childminders often bring their groups to open pre-schools, too.
Children and young people can contact the school health service, a youth clinic or a BUP or PBU youth psychiatric clinic.
Children and young people who speak a language other than Swedish at home receive instruction at school in their native language, modersmål.
Children are also vaccinated against certain diseases.
Children are thus sometimes permitted to take part in making decisions; they learn to respect one another, to take other viewpoints into consideration and to understand human differences as a natural part of life.
Children at risk In Sweden, childbeating is regarded as such a serious crime that even outsiders should intervene.
Children can run into a difficult situation for any number of reasons.
Children can seek help from the school nurse or the child protection organisation BRIS.
Children have an ombudsman of their own, BO, who is charged with representing children’s interests in society.
Children of two foreign citizens must also have a residence permit.
Children often have a party and invite their friends.
Children under six years of age must sit on a special cushion or child’s safety seat.
Children who are at home with their parents can go to open pre-schools, öppna förskolor*.
Children with a Swedish mother are always granted Swedish citizenship at birth.
Children with functional disabilities often attend ordinary pre-schools and schools, and sometimes receive help from a remedial teacher and a personal assistant.
Children with rifles.
Children’s age also affects their eligibility for transportation.
Children’s healthcare centres monitor children’s vision, height and weight regularly until they reach school age.
Children’s healthcare centres sometimes offer courses for new parents.
Children’s plays are often put on by independent troupes.
Chlamydia is the most common venereal disease.
Christianity came to Sweden in the eleventh century, and many churches were built during the early Middle Ages.
Christianity spread slowly.
Christmas Eve, julafton, falls on 24 December, and by then most people have a Christmas tree, julgran, real or artificial, at home.
Christmas is a Christian holiday, but even before the advent of Christendom a great fertility festival, fruktbarhetsfest*, was celebrated in late autumn.
Christmas, julen, is the biggest holiday of the year in Sweden, and commemorates the birth of Jesus.
Church members pay a church membership fee.
Churches also organise a variety of musical activities and events.
Churches and associations therefore arrange alternative Christmas, alternativ jul, events at which all are welcome.
196 Churches and faith Religion in today’s Sweden
Churches and Faith Religion in today’s Sweden We all have a sense of right and wrong, and beliefs about how people should live their lives, both individually and collectively.
Churches often take practical social responsibility for refugees and others.
Circumcision of boys is not actually prohibited, but under new legislation may only be carried out by a doctor or a person with special authorisation.
Cities are generally served by many local bus routes.
Civil cases generally involve money or family issues such as divorces and custody of children.
Class 1 mopeds are often referred to as “EU mopeds”.
Climate issues – through their present lifestyle, humans are changing conditions for other forms of life on Earth.
Close relatives may, however, prevent the health services from taking organs if the deceased has not registered as a donor.
Clothing and furniture often have labels indicating what they are made of.
Co-operation between independent states instead of EU membership.
Cold crystals danced in her wake under the streetlights.
Collective agreements also sometimes include agreements on “collective assurance”, providing extra protection in the event of a work-related injury or the like.
Coloured eggshells and other decorations are strung from the feather-dressed birch twigs.
Common-law spouses can also be granted joint custody, gemensam vårdnad, by applying to the municipal social welfare committee.
Computers are available to visitors for this purpose.
concerned about their children; the number is 077-150 50 50.
Conspiracy to carry out genital mutilation abroad, or to have it carried out abroad by others, is also prohibited.
Contact the municipality to find out whether child care is available in your native language.
Contact the parish registrar’s office that serves as the local office of the Church of Sweden.
Contact the police to do so.
Contact your municipality for more information on what is available where you live.
Contents
Conversations, samtal, and discussions on human relations, both private and social, and about right and wrong, are another important element.
Council meetings are sometimes broadcast on local radio or television.
County administrative boards are in charge of regional planning.
County councils usually manage country bus services, while the municipalities manage the city bus services.
County theatres put on shows for both adults and children and sometimes appear at schools.
Courses often include Swedish, social studies, computer science and other topics that may be needed by those wishing to continue on to higher education.
Credit cards are generally regarded as an expensive way of borrowing money, and one you should be careful of.
Credit cards, kreditkort, are cards (bank cards, debit cards or other types) that are linked to a line of credit – that is, an opportunity to borrow money.
Crispbread with cheese, preferably with a fresh vegetable for the vitamins’ sake.
Crooked path to community continued You are going to make a lot of blunders.
Cuckoos don’t necessarily consult the calendar, of course, so you can never be sure they will put in an appearance.
Cultivated land accounts for less than one tenth of the total land area and is found primarily in the south.
“Culture” can mean a lot of things.
Current cultural events are usually advertised there.
Currently there are an estimated 12,000 Buddhists in Sweden, most of them immigrants from Vietnam, Thailand, Sri Lanka and Tibet.
Custody and the right of access are governed by the terms of the decree made by the district court.
Dancing, cooking and storytelling are culture too.
Deaths must be reported to the local tax authority, which handles the national population registration.
29 Debate, vote, influence How Sweden is governed
Debit cards are usually more expensive than bank cards.
Decisions of both general and administrative courts may be appealed against if either party considers the decision to be incorrect.
Dehydrated livestock.
Demanding payment – key money, svarta pengar – for a rental unit is illegal.
Dentists are allowed to set their own prices, and it is thus worthwhile to shop around.
Dessert is often fresh strawberries.
Differences between rich and poor were striking.
Different landlords have different rules for the maintenance, underhåll, of flats – the work that must be done to keep the flat in good condition, such as putting up new wallpaper.
Different types of child care are available for children of different ages.
District nurses are also part of the primary care system.
Diversity becomes everyday life For a while, it seemed natural to speak of the Swedes and their immigrants, or of the majority society and its minorities, or of Swedish culture and multiculture.
Divorced and unmarried parents and their children are fully accepted in Sweden.
Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.
Do you know the rules applicable to bookkeeping and payment of taxes and social welfare charges?
Doctors, architects, nurses, fire engineers, dentists and pharmacists are examples of professionals who must complete an occupationally oriented degree.
Doing so may be punishable by a fine or imprisonment, and you may be required to surrender your driving licence, too.
Don’t give up!
During certain periods from the Middle Ages on, other ethnic groups also started coming to Sweden: German merchants, Belgian smiths, English shipbuilders.
During the reign of Charles XII, Sweden was at war with Denmark, and Charles XII died in Norway, then under Danish rule.
During the rest of the week, the children go to school and spend time at recreation centres or day nurseries, while their parents are away at work.
During their services, which are sometimes referred to as “salvation meetings”, it is not unusual for people to approach the preacher and “give themselves to Jesus” or “be saved”.
During this period, the Christian churches commemorate what happened to Jesus during the final period before his crucifixion.
During this period, the parents should seek to find the best possible solutions for their children.
During this period, these kings were united in a single realm and began to cooperate with the church.
Each parish consists of a geographically defined area, usually with its own church and sometimes with several.
Early in their schooling, children learn how babies come into the world, how their bodies work, and that contraceptives are generally available.
Easter Sunday falls on different dates in different years.
Eating together is enjoyable and affords an opportunity to practise waiting your turn, conversing and getting used to different types of food.
Educational associations organise study circles, free churches hold services, sports associations organise training and competitions, environmental groups hold meetings to discuss various environmental problems.
Educational content At pre-schools and recreation centres, the children are usually allowed to play freely some of the time.
Elderly people are often helped by their children and grandchildren, but they can also get help with cooking, cleaning and the like from the municipal home help service.
Eligibility for course admission, särskild behörighet, is usually required, too, and depends on the nature of the programme you are applying for.
Embarrassed, she ploughed through the slush to where he was standing, and with a damp woollen mitten, pressed her umbrella into his hand.
Embarrassing.
Employees may be given notice only under certain conditions.
Employment grants, anställningsstöd, are paid by the Employment Office to employers hiring a person who has been unemployed for a long period of time.
Employment Office You should register as a jobseeker at the Employment Office, Arbetsförmedlingen, as soon as you receive a residence permit, even if you have not yet mastered Swedish.
Equality between women and men.
EU citizens residing in Sweden are entitled to vote in Swedish municipal and county council elections.
Even if an elderly couple has home help service, caring for a sick partner demands a lot of time and energy.
Even if it sometimes seems hard to believe, this is one of the world’s wonderful places.
Even if one of the parents receives sole custody, the other has both the right and the obligation to visit the children.
Even if parents want the best for their children, families sometimes encounter problems which they find it difficult to manage on their own.
Even if the ceremony is held according to the traditions of another religion, the deceased may be buried at a cemetery belonging to the Church of Sweden.
Even if you have relatives or friends in one of the large cities, there is no guarantee that it can provide the best future for you and your family.
Even if you still have a residence permit, you may run into problems at the border control if your permit certificate has expired.
Even in the strong community of Sweden’s modern welfare state, some people were more equal than others.
Even people who do not regularly attend church often baptise their children, hold church wedding ceremonies and bury their dead with a church ceremony.
Every county council decides what fee will be charged in its own particular region.
Every day there are also organised activities such as group games, exercise or dancing, outings and work on shared projects.
Every evening, we walked along the street.
Every night I asked Mother to walk along Drottninggatan with me.
Every person in Sweden is entitled to have important issues tried in a court of law.
Every term, parents are called in for a developmental conversation, utvecklingssamtal, at which you and your child meet the teacher, klassläraren, or mentor, mentorn.
Every year, you receive notification from the Insurance Office of how large your future income-based pension can be expected to be.
Everyone can freely express his or her opinion, and there are political parties that represent different opinions.
Everyone in the car must wear a safety belt – front seat and back – including children.
Everyone who owns a registered vehicle must pay motor vehicle tax, fordonsskatt.
Everyone with the right to vote is entitled to stand for election.
Examples include glassblowing, sawmill technology, rescue services, aeronautics and tourism.
Factories began to be built – textile mills, sawmills, papermills, ironworks, metal shops, etc.
Families are important for most people in Sweden, even if the family members live in different cities.
Families, couples and relatives
Families have many faces in Sweden.
Families with low income can apply for an additional supplement to the student grant.
Families with many children receive a special supplementary allowance.
Fathers can spend much of the day at the maternity ward after the baby is born.
Fees, avgifterna, are the money you pay to the municipality for services such as electricity and day nursery care.
Female physicians, people who sing in choirs and parents who want more staff in the day nurseries are examples of groups that may establish networks to stay in touch with one another.
Fiftieth birthdays in particular are cause for proper celebration, with presents, parties and the flag flying high.
Film festivals are another place where such films can be seen.
Film You can see cinematic films, biograffilm, in most municipalities.
Filmmakers can apply to the Institute for financial support.
Films are not always shown at cinemas; sometimes they are shown at assembly halls of various types, such as community centres, club premises and the like.
Finally all he could see was a tiny pearl necklace of sleet glittering in her proud African hair.
92 Finding a good job The Swedish labour market
Finding work is often easier in a smaller city, too.
Finland is also sometimes counted as a Scandinavian country.
Fish balls and bread.
Fishing with a fishing rod is permitted in the country’s five largest lakes and along the coast, but otherwise you must have the permission of the owner of the fishing grounds.
Flexitime, flextid, means that you do not have to come and go at exact hours.
Folk high schools often have boarding facilities; students live at school.
Following the Second World War, survivors arrived from the Nazi concentration camps, and since then, most Jewish immigrants have come from eastern Europe.
Food items that spoil quickly such as mince or milk often also have a use before date, sista förbrukningsdag – the last date on which you can be sure the food is good to eat.
Foodstuffs and flowers may not be exchanged, nor as a general rule may underwear or bathing suits.
For a century or more, old beliefs coexisted with the new, but gradually the new faith took over and Christian churches sprang up everywhere.
For a passing grade of G, students must achieve the goals of the syllabus for the subject in question.
For addresses, look under the headings Museer and Gallerier in the Yellow Pages.
For admission to complete educational programmes that last several years, you apply to the VHS.
For all motor vehicles, including mopeds, you must carry third party liability insurance, trafikförsäkring.
For children and youth, there are special preparatory classes in schools and pre-schools.
For citizens of Nordic countries, people who are married to a Swedish citizen, stateless people and refugees, the period is shorter.
For complete information, contact the Migration Board.
For details, ask at the parish registrar’s office.
For example, in Sweden shops need a permit from the fire brigade, cafeterias and groceries need a permit from the environmental and health care authorities, and special permits are required for trading in open-air markets and serving alcoholic beverages.
For example, parents with children at day nurseries pay the same fee regardless of which nursery they select.
For her part, she had made a commitment to the minute details.
For instance, education at compulsory school or upper-secondary school level for a maximum of six months might be a suitable alternative.
For longer trips, you can choose to travel by air, train or bus.
For many expatriate Swedes, the image of Sweden is a red cottage on a lake, with a Swedish flag billowing in the breeze.
For many families, weekends are their only days together.
For many people living in the country, Riksteatern is their local theatre.
For many, the day is a strong symbol of spring.
For me, anyway.
For me, it meant: no shells.
For members of the Church of Sweden, the funeral fee is included in the church fee, which is also paid along with income tax.
For more information, contact your country’s embassy.
For more information on free churches, see the chapter on Religion.
For more information on parents’ allowance and sickness benefits, see the end of this chapter.
For more information on registration, see the section on registration, tax and inspection later in this chapter.
For more information on sickness benefits, see the chapter on Money.
For more information on student celebrations, see the chapter on Schools and Education.
For more information on Swedish political life, see the chapter on Democracy.
For more information on taxes and subsidies, see the chapter on Money.
For more information on the debt enforcement service, see the chapter on Law and order.
For more information on the right of common access, see the chapter on Law and order.
For more information on these topics, see the chapter on Money.
For more information, see the brochure “Kan någon annan få dina njurar när du dör?”, which is available at pharmacies.
For more information, see the chapter on Care and support.
For more information, see the chapter on Child care.
For more information, see the chapter on Families and social life.
For more information, see the chapter on History.
For more information, see the chapter on Law and order.
For more information, see the chapter on Money.
For more information, see the chapter on Schools and education.
For more information, see the chapter on The Municipality.
For more information, see the chapter on Work.
For more information, see the section on Upper-secondary school.
For more on this topic, see the chapter on Democracy.
For most Swedes, Midsummer means a party to celebrate the summer with dancing round the maypole.
For new residents – such as you – to make the most of their opportunities, they need good information.
For shame would be proof of your humanity.
For the first time in my life, the whole family is there to meet me.
For this is where sinners are revealed.
For this reason, both the state and the universities encourage young people with foreign backgrounds to continue their education.
For this reason, it is Temporary services important to take active steps to look for a job.
For this reason, to help prevent accidents and keep the environmental impact of motor traffic to an absolute minimum, the demands made of drivers have also grown much tougher.
For war is not about shells, snipers, mines and armies.
For women, financial or social security might be an important consideration.
For young people who are unsure whether they want to or are able to pursue higher education, an introduction, introduktion, may be a good idea.
Foreign university educations are evaluated by the National Agency for Higher Education.
Foreign upper-secondary school education is evaluated by another public authority, the Verket för högskoleservice, abbreviated VHS.
“Forgotten?!” says my neighbour.
Foul grey lint.
Four of the large rivers in northern Sweden are nature reserves.
Four religious families meet in the Christian Council of Sweden, which brings together 25 member churches.
Freedom of the press is the right to express your opinions in books and periodicals freely and without political censorship.
Freedom of the press therefore does not mean that anything that can be printed actually is printed.
From fourth to sixth grade, some schoolchildren have access to open recreational centres.
Full brothers and sisters, helsyskon – siblings with the same mother and father – are not permitted to marry.
Full, half, or one-quarter allowances are available depending on how much care is required.
Functionally disabled people may be able to receive a grant to fund certain alterations of their flat.
Funding comes from three sources: taxes, government grants and fees.
General administrative courts handle cases involving relations between public authorities and private people.
General courts, allmänna domstolar, handle criminal and civil cases.
Generally speaking, decisions on important issues are not made directly by the government.
Generally speaking, it is not necessary to spend the night in hospital; you can go home the same day.
Generally speaking, you should contact a healthcare centre if you fall ill during the daytime hours.
Getting used to a new country can be both exciting and frustrating.
Give Sweden the benefit of the doubt.
Give the country a chance it really is worth it.
God, how they have changed.
Good Friday is a public holiday and most people take the day off work.
Good native language skills may also be valuable on the labour market.
Good places to find what you are looking for are the library or a tourist office, turistbyrå.
GOOD TO KNOW
Government A municipality is governed by politicians from various parties, who serve in a group known as the municipal council, kommunfullmäktige.
Government grants, statsbidrag, are money received from the state.
Great changes occurred in the nineteenth century.
Groups of young people used to go from house to house singing Maj är välkommen – “May is welcome”; sometimes they received biscuits or sweets in return.
Growing income gaps and the impact of the state’s savings programmes, which has affected many people, have led to hot debate.
Guests dance round the Christmas tree for the last time, singing:
Gustaf III wanted to expand royal power and reduce the power of the nobility, which made the nobility his enemies.
Gustaf III was shot at a masquerade by one of the guests, a nobleman who had come to the party with a pistol secreted in his coat.
Hanna Wallensteen, born in 1971, was adopted by a Swedish family and brought from Ethiopia to Sweden when she was six months old.
Hanse merchants also enjoyed great power in the Swedish cities that began to grow during the Middle Ages.
He fell in battle during the Battle of Lützen, slaget vid Lützen.
He is the man behind many of Sweden’s best-known films, and was the leading figure in Swedish cinema for decades.
He or she can help you find the right treatment.
He politely shook her hand and continued on his way.
He proclaimed himself head of the church and let the state take over much of the church’s wealth.
He turned around and waved.
He wanted me to feel frightened and uncertain.
He’d probably come straight from war and disaster.
Health and medical care is provided subject to your approval.
Help from the family Families do a lot for their older relatives in Sweden, too.
Help getting started If you would like to discuss your business idea with knowledgeable people, you can get help from the Internationella Företagarföreningen i Sweden (IFS), which has offices in seventeen Swedish cities.
Her dreams and memories were Swedish.
Her, in the red coat.
Her maidens, tärnor, carry candles in their hands, and tinsel glitters in their hair.
Her roots were here.
Her thoughts and feelings were in the Swedish language.
Here are a few examples of programmes:
Here are a few special regulations that apply in Sweden:
Here, too, you are entitled to change your mind within two weeks of the date when you received the package.
Here we discuss the types of child care available in Sweden.
Here, we provide a summary of the basic regulations currently applicable.
Here we will only discuss the new system.
Here, we will simply point out that you must have lived in Sweden for a certain number of years to receive a full guarantee pension.
Here you can read about the country’s development from prehistoric times to the present day.
Here, you can talk to a person who is bound by an oath of confidentiality, tystnadsplikt, meaning that he or she cannot pass on what you have said to other people.
His accusation stings.
HIV/AIDS is the most dangerous venereal disease.
Home furnishing loans If you are a refugee or close relative of a refugee, you may be entitled to borrow money for necessary furnishings.
Home help service personnel are generally trained nursing assistants, and can thus provide basic healthcare.
Home help service personnel may do jobs such as putting breakfast or an evening meal on the table, washing up, cleaning and shopping.
Home insurance policies also often include travel coverage, reseskydd, that is applicable if you travel abroad for no more than 45 days, legal expenses coverage, rättsskydd, which provides compensation for expenses associated with certain legal issues, and coverage against assault, överfallsskydd, in case you are assaulted and the person who has done the damage is unable to compensate you.
Home selling, hemförsäljning, includes door-to-door sales and telephone sales.
Hospital care never costs more than a certain amount per day.
How could the world just watch it happen?
How could you watch it happen?
How do you find a good job?
107 How much does it cost?
How much you may borrow depends on how many people there are in your family, what furnishings you have and how much money you have.
How much you receive depends on how much you earn and own, how many children you have, how much you pay for your accommodation, and how large it is.
43 How we usually do things…
How will you market your company?
However, every three years, you must renew the permit certificate, beviset – the document attesting to the fact that you have a residence permit.
However, if there are no written rules, there are usually unwritten rules that evolve among the people living in the building and that may vary from area to area.
However, if you decline a treatment that a physician considers necessary, responsibility for your health is transferred from the physician to you personally.
However, it is sometimes necessary to separate children from their families.
However, pursuant to a decision of the Swedish Parliament, or Riksdag, plans are in place to phase out and eventually cease using nuclear power altogether.
However, some species may be hunted during certain limited seasons.
Hum a Swedish folk song now and then.
Hunting and fishing are not covered by the right of common access.
Hunting and fishing issues, nature conservation and environmental protection are also handled by the county administrative boards.
Husmanskost is hearty fare.
”I am adopted from Ethiopia,” she said in prim schoolgirl English.
I break out in a sweat.
I didn’t know what to feel.
I didn’t need more.
I didn’t want to think about that.
I feel as if the sky may fall on me.
I felt the whole world owed me something.
I had missed lights.
I have lived in Sweden for 25 years.
I know lint filters get no mention in the Bible, the Koran, the Abhidharma or the Mahabharata.
I know the unspoken rules well enough to break them.
I liked walking there.
I look down at the lint filter.
I looked at their faces and wondered.
“I’m not like you.
I nearly faint.
I needed your bad conscience to convince me that you were capable of caring about anything at all.
I never saw what the lights shone on, but the fact that they shone meant there was something in the windows.
I often get angry.
I spent the days eating.
I think that person, the one who could care about that, died in Sarajevo.
I tried not to be more unpleasant than usual.
I wanted to enjoy the light while it was there.
I would keep sleeping there till I woke up and went back to bed.
If a child must be hospitalised, it is often possible for one of the parents to stay there, too, so the sick child does not have to be alone.
If a commission is dealing with integration issues, for example, the Integration Board, other authorities and many immigrant associations might be asked to submit opinions on the report.
If a crime has been committed, the courts can both pass judgement and sentence the guilty party.
If a doctor at the healthcare centre feels that you require specialist care at a hospital, he or she will arrange for the appropriate treatment.
If a landlord or tenant-owner building society says “no” even though you have adequate finances or have secured a guarantor, and vacant flats are available, it may be a case of discrimination, diskriminering*.
If a new pair of shoes falls apart after a week, you can bring the shoes and the receipt back to the store.
If a patient requires several different types of care, primary care personnel coordinate the treatment that will be required.
If a person dies at home, a physician can come and issue a death certificate.
If a physician feels that a woman should not work at all during the last two months of pregnancy, she may be eligible for pregnancy benefits, havandeskapspenning, instead.
If a translation of the written test is not available in a language you know, the National Road Administration can arrange for an interpreter.
If a woman decides to have an abortion, the maternity care centre can make the arrangements.
If an injunction is issued, the enforcement service undertakes to collect the debt.
If both the man and woman wish to divorce, they file a joint petition for divorce at the district court.
If children suffer poor treatment at the hands of one of the parents, the parent may lose the right to see his or her children.
If, for example, you wish to arrange a concert, dancing, a market, or a meeting in which many people will be taking part, you must first obtain the permission of the police.
If he does so nevertheless, he may be fined or imprisoned.
If he or she breaks the law again during that period, the punishment is usually immediate imprisonment.
If it is a new relationship, however, the Migration Board usually only grants a temporary residence permit to start with.
If it is hard for you to cook for yourself, you can have prepared food delivered to your home.
If not, they try to find a foster home, familjehem, a family that will care for the child for a certain period.
If only one party wishes to divorce and the couple cannot reach agreement, the party wishing to divorce can file alone.
If parents want to change something at the school, it is important that the parents’ association can function properly.
If so, the consultation will cost no more than a visit to a county council physician.
If so, you may return the item after a day or two, provided you have not used it, and ask for your money back.
If suspects are to be held longer, they must be detained in temporary custody by a prosecutor (see next section).
If that does not help, you may contact the patientnämnden, or patients’ advisory committee, previously known as the förtroende-
If the death occurred at a hospital, the hospital itself provides the death certificate.
If the deceased’s assets are small, an estate statement, dödsboanmälan, will suffice.
If the Employment Office finds a position that might suit you, you are generally obliged to take it.
If the introduction takes two terms, it is sometimes termed a “foundation year”.
If the Migration Board rejects a residence permit application, an appeal, beslutet against the decision may be lodged with the Aliens’ Appeals Board.
If the parties are so far apart that settlement is impossible, the district court reviews all material presented by the parties and then issues its judgement.
If the people involved have lived together previously, a permanent residence permit is usually granted immediately.
If the physician is not affiliated with the Social Insurance Office, however, it will be much more expensive.
If the relative in Sweden holds a power of attorney authorising him or her to speak on behalf of the applicant, he or she may formulate the appeal and send in the appeal document.
If the student is having trouble at school, it is important to take up the matter for discussion with the teacher.
If there is a local trade union branch at your place of work, you can check with the union representative whether your contract is consistent with the terms agreed upon by the union and the employer.
If there is no suspicion that a crime has been committed in conjunction with the death, the authorities try to take the wishes of the family into consideration.
If they do not have anything you want at the time, you receive a credit note, tillgodokvitto, that you can use to buy something later.
If they suspect criminal activity, an exception is made – if, for example, a child has been beaten or sexually molested.
If this is impossible, the police must be summoned.
If this kind of thing is discovered later, the landlord can evict a tenant who has had lodgers without permission.
If you are a foreign citizen and a member of one of the Swedish parties, you may run for election to the municipal or county council.
If you are a foreign citizen, you are not entitled to vote in parliamentary elections.
If you are a foreign citizen, you can contact either your embassy or the Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs to find out what type of marriage your country requires.
If you are a member of an association, you can propose to the association’s board that it organise a special meeting before the election.
If you are applying as a “25:4” candidate, you have to take the national university aptitude test, högskoleprovet, which is given twice a year.
If you are applying on the basis of your upper-secondary school grades, you are not required to take the aptitude test.
If you are at least 25 years old, you can choose to be sterilised.
If you are considering starting your own company, you can learn everything you need to know about VAT and corporate tax returns at one of the Employment Office’s starting-up courses.
If you are employed by a temp agency, you often receive a full salary while you are working at a company and a lower salary during periods when your services are not being used.
If you are employed, your employer must deduct tax before paying your wages.
If you are ill for more than two weeks, you receive sickness benefits, sjukpenning, from the Insurance Office.
If you are interested in learning more about Sweden’s literary, art or architectural history, again, the library is the place to find out what is available.
If you are married to another foreign national and have children, you should apply to the Migration Board for residence permits for the children.
If you are not satisfied with a decision of the tax authorities, you can request reconsideration, omprövning.
If you are not satisfied with the decision of an authority, you may lodge an appeal against the decision with a higher authority or an administrative court and ask to have the decision reviewed.
If you are not sure, ask your healthcare centre whom to contact.
If you are not sure whether something you are buying will suit you, you can ask to take it on a sale or return basis, öppet köp.
If you are selfemployed, you must also declare your VAT, moms, a tax that is levied on goods and services.
If you are sick longer, you receive sickness benefits, sjukpenningfrom the Social Insurance Office.
If you are sick, they can help you get up in the morning, go to bed at night and take your medicines.
If you are sick, you receive no benefits on the first day, which is known as the qualifying period, karensdag.
If you are so ill that you are unable to leave your home, someone from the healthcare centre can make a house call.
If you are trying to find a particular book or magazine, you can search the library’s catalogues, kataloger, which are now usually electronic.
If you are unsure what to do, contact a healthcare centre first.
If you are working illegally, or “black”, arbeta svart, your employer is not paying tax or the social welfare charges, sociala avgifter, that go towards your health insurance and future pension.
If you believe an official has made an incorrect decision, you can often lodge an appeal against the decision with someone at a higher level.
If you believe that a public authority has broken the rules governing its operations, you can appeal to the Parliamentary Ombudsman, Justitieombudsmannen, JO.
If you believe that an employer has broken the rule requiring equal treatment of men and women, you can report the matter to the Equal Opportunities Ombudsman, Jämställdhetsombudsmannen, Jämo.
If you belong to the Church of Sweden, a church funeral is free of charge.
If you buy a car from a dealer, the dealer will usually help you with registration.
If you buy a car in Sweden, you must report the purchase to the registry of the National Road Administration.
If you can read Swedish, you can find more information on religions in Sweden in the book “Gud har 99 namn”, a guide to religiously diverse Sweden published by the Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company (UR).
If you cannot agree, you can approach the Tenants’ Union for advice.
If you cannot pay your entire debt at once, you should contact the person to whom you owe the money as quickly as possible to see whether you can reach some form of agreement.
If you come from a country other than those listed above, different rules apply.
If you come from a country outside the EU, you are entitled to vote in municipal and county council elections if you have a residence permit and have lived in Sweden for at least three years.
If you decide to buy but change your mind within two weeks, the sale can be cancelled.
If you do not cancel your appointment, you may have to pay the fee even though you did not come.
If you do not have a profession, the municipality will give you the opportunity to get the training needed to begin working.
If you do not have a regular source of income, you may be able to arrange for a guarantor, borgensman – a friend or relative who will pledge to pay the rent if you should encounter difficulties.
If you do not have home insurance, you will receive no compensation if your residence is damaged by a fire, or if something is stolen.
If you do not know how to use a computer, ask someone who works at the library.
If you do not select a trust, your premium pension funds are placed with a state unit trust company.
If you do not wish to study for a particular profession and want to choose your courses yourself, you earn a general degree.
If you do not work all year or have large deductions for interest paid on loans or the like, it may be a good idea to request a tax adjustment, jämkning*.
If you do so, you cannot have children.
If you fall ill for a longer period, you may be eligible for a temporary disability allowance.
If you fall ill when the healthcare centre is closed, there are places you can call for advice and consultation.
If you feel the information in the case book is inaccurate, you may ask your physician to correct it.
If you feel you have been treated improperly or non-objectively by the press, you can contact the Press Ombudsman, PO.
If you feel you need help in discussing your situation, you can contact a family counselling officer, familjerådgivning.
If you find yourself in such a situation, you should first contact the local tax office where you are registered.
If you get a job in a city other than the one you currently live in, the Employment Office can provide a moving expense grant, flyttningsbidrag, to help defray your initial travel and moving expenses and help get you on your feet in the new city.
If you get married outside Sweden, the marriage is recognised in Sweden only if it is valid in the country in which you were married.
If you have a driving licence issued in an another EEA country (Denmark, Finland, Norway, Iceland, Germany, France, the UK, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Liechtenstein, Spain, Italy, Greece, Portugal, Ireland or Austria), you may use your own national driving licence throughout the period of validity indicated on the licence.
If you have a functional disability, you can apply for färdtjänst, a transportation service for disabled persons, for personal assistance and interpreting, and for technical aids such as wheelchairs, hearing aids, talking books, talböcker*, and text telephones, texttelefoner*.
If you have a profession, the municipality will help you find a practical training position so you can develop the skills and make the contacts you need to get started in Sweden as quickly as possible.
If you have an alien’s passport or travel document indicating that your nationality has not been confirmed, you should contact the embassy of the country you wish to visit to find out whether you will be permitted to enter.
If you have become a Swedish citizen, you may apply for a Swedish passport.
If you have been given an official non-payment notice, it thus becomes more difficult to rent a flat or take a bank loan.
If you have been here for a shorter period, your pension will be accordingly lower.
If you have children attending a pre-school or recreation centre, you will be invited to come in for a child development discussion, utvecklingssamtal.
If you have children under 16, you will have to wait at least six months, and no more than one year, for the divorce to be registered.
If you have committed a crime or have unpaid debts for taxes, fines or maintenance, it may take longer to become a Swedish citizen.
If you have decided to have an abortion, it is best to do so as early as possible.
If you have diabetes, for example, you can meet other diabetes sufferers and learn more about dealing with your condition through the Svenska diabetesförbundet.
If you have home insurance, it will often cover some legal expenses.
If you have major home healthcare needs, a visiting nurse, distriktssköterska, can come to your home.
If you have moved abroad when the time comes up to renew the certificate, your permanent residence permit will be revoked.
If you have not reported that you object to donation, the healthcare system assumes that you consent.
If you have received too much money, you may be required to pay some of it back.
If you have worked less than a year for your current employer, you are entitled to a shorter holiday in your first year.
If you hit another car, the liability insurance covers any damage to the other car and its passengers.
If you join a union, you become a member of its unemployment benefit fund.
If you know a professional interpreter whom you trust, you may request that he or she be hired to help you.
If you know you are HIV positive, you must use a condom or make sure your partner uses a condom.
If you miss the reminder, the landlord or company will often contact a debt collection agency, inkassobyrå, a company that specialises in collecting unpaid debts.
If you need an interpreter, be sure to say so in advance.
If you need such a procedure, you can ask your physician if the waiting list is shorter at a hospital in another city.
If you need to be absent longer, you must obtain a medical certificate, läkarintyg.
If you need to discuss such feelings, you can contact the centres for crime victims that have been set up in many cities.
If you only want to take a single course, you may apply directly to the university or university college you are interested in.
If you or a family member has a serious accident or a sudden serious illness, you can call the emergency telephone number, 112.
If you or someone in your family has a psychiatric problem, you can begin by discussing it with your regular healthcare centre physician.
If you or someone you know needs help with a substance abuse problem, contact the social services, your doctor or the district nurse at your healthcare centre.
If you reach a certain total within a twelve-month period, you receive free medicine during the remainder of the period.
If you receive a housing allowance, you must notify the Insurance Office of all changes in your finances or household, e.g. if the size of your salary changes, if you have more children or if relatives move in with you.
If you receive home care, both the county council and the municipality can provide additional support.
If you receive notice of dismissal and are a union member, you can ask your union representative whether notice has been given in accordance with the rules.
If you require additional care, you can be admitted to a hospital psychiatric ward or receive care at home.
If you require hospital care, you are entitled to choose the hospital where you will be treated.
If you see a doctor you like, you can ask to have him or her as your personal physician.
If you start working in a different industry – a restaurant instead of a shop, for example – you usually have to switch unemployment benefit funds, too.
If you suspect a violation of the Equal Rights Act, report it to your labour union, which can make a report to JämO.
If you suspect that you have been mistreated on grounds of your ethnic origins, sex, sexual orientation or functional disability, you may be able to obtain free legal advice from one of the ombudsmen charged with dealing with such issues.
If you suspect your child has begun using drugs, you can contact the social services for advice and information.
If you take an occupationally oriented degree, your studies are mapped out from the start.
If you take the bus frequently, it is less expensive to buy a monthly pass or other discount ticket rather than buy a separate ticket for each trip.
If you want to buy a co-operative flat, you should first agree on a price with the current owner.
If you want to move, you must inform your landlord by giving notice at least three months before you intend to move out.
If you want to save money or make a few quick changes to your flat, you can paint or wallpaper yourself.
If you want your child to be given other vaccinations – if you plan to travel abroad, for example – you generally have to go to a private vaccination centre and pay whatever they charge.
If you wish to consult a private physician, you should first ask whether he or she is affiliated with the Social Insurance Office.
If you wish to quit your job, you must provide notice, usually a month in advance.
If you wish, you may thus refuse or discontinue a treatment or a course of medicine.
If you would like to learn more about how the introduction is organised in your municipality, contact the person in charge of local introductions.
If you would like to learn more about the place where you live, you can get information through the local history society, hembygdsförening.
If you would like to learn more, contact your local parish office.
If your child has special dietary needs, speak with the kitchen staff.
If your child is afraid of something or someone at the school, for example, it is important that the teachers know about it.
If your child is having trouble in a particular subject – physical education, for example – you might speak both to the main class teacher and to the physical education teacher.
If your illness prevents you from working full-time but you can still work part of the day, you may be eligible for quarter, half or three-quarter sickness benefits.
Illegal employees cost employers less and, if you are unemployed, it may seem tempting to you, too.
Images remembered from CNN: dying trees.
Important issues: increased local power, equal rights to education and social welfare, free enterprise, environmental work, international solidarity.
Improved personnel policies, with continuing education and generous compensation in the care sector.
In 1909, a law was passed giving all men, not only the rich, the right to vote.
In addition, he had involved Sweden in a war against Russia that many considered senseless.
In addition to income tax and VAT, there are taxes on wealth, property, inheritances, gifts and capital gains.
In addition to judges, the courts are often made up of jurors, nämndemän, who have no legal training and are in court as representatives of the public.
In addition to many Christian, kristna, churches, there are Jewish, judiska, congregations, Muslim, muslimska, congregations of various types, Hindu, hinduiska, and Buddhist, buddhistiska, communities, and practitioners of the Bahá’í faith and Sikhism.
In addition to the national theatres, county theatres and the touring theatre, there are private theatres, privatteatrar, primarily in the major cities, and independent theatre troupes, fria teatergrupper.
In addition to the sectarian religious organisations, there are groups that promote dialogue and understanding between religions.
In all of these cases, municipal or healthcare personnel evaluate your need before approving or rejecting the application.
In any case, he didn’t seem to feel he owed me anything at all.
In any case, it is a good idea to go through a real-estate agent if you want to buy a house or flat.
In any case, we cannot opt out of the ethnic and cultural diversity of our society.
In broad strokes, the socialist parties generally support public-sector solutions and believe that the state should take major responsibility for people’s wellbeing.
In calculating your preliminary tax, the tax authorities assume that you earn the same amount every month and that you do not have any deductions, avdrag*, to make on your tax return.
In case.
In 2000, church and state went their separate ways, however, and the Church of Sweden became an independent Evangelical Lutheran, fristående church.
In Dalarna, which organises the country’s most renowned Midsummer celebrations, the same pole is often used year after year, and the pole, with its withered decorations, is left standing until it’s time to decorate it again next Midsummer.
In fact, though, you can celebrate the new year several times in Sweden if you want to.
In front of the drier.
In general, the parties have a local association in every municipality, or at least in the larger municipalities.
In larger municipalities, there may be kommundelsnämnder or stadsdelsnämnder, neighbourhood councils, which handle municipal duties within a particular neighbourhood or part of a municipality.
In late summer, many go fishing for crayfish, or buy them ready prepared, and hold crayfish parties, kräftfester.
In legal language, a divorce is called a decree absolute, äktenskapsskillnad, or dissolution of marriage, and is issued by a district court.
In many cases, an elderly person who falls ill is cared for by his or her spouse.
In many cities and towns, parents may receive relief, with someone else taking charge of care for a while so the parents can take a break.
In many cities and towns, there are outpatient psychiatric clinics where you can talk to a psychologist or psychiatrist, a physician specialising in psychiatry.
In many larger cities, there are special employment offices for different professional groups, such as technology, industry, care and finance.
In many towns, however, there is only one local or regional newspaper.
In most cities, drivers are not permitted to idle their engines, tomgång, for more than one or a few minutes if the car is not moving.
In most towns there is a public Midsummer celebration in the town square, sports field or community centre.
In our society, everyone is entitled to equal rights and opportunities.
In recent years, the American tradition of Halloween has come to Sweden.
In some areas, friends dress up and stop by to surprise the celebrant the night before his or her birthday.
In some cases, a close relative – your husband or wife, your parents, child or sibling – may confirm your identity.
In some cases, a publicly appointed defence counsel represents the defendant.
In some cases, a woman may feel that the threat is so great that she must seek protection by moving to another city.
In some cases, driving licences issued in Switzerland or Japan may also be similarly exchanged.
In some cases, enforcement service personnel are permitted to enter the debtor’s home and seize furniture or other valuables as compensation for the debt.
In some cases, the fee may be as high as the rent on a rental flat.
In some cases, the money may be taken from the debtor’s wages, sickness benefits or unemployment benefits.
In some cases, the parties are so far apart that divorce is the best solution for all involved.
In some cases, you can be compensated for trips to a healthcare centre or hospital.
In some cities and certain areas, the percentage is much higher.
In some cities and towns, there are also church-run family counselling agencies.
In some cities, other religious communities have their own cemeteries.
In some cities, Swedish flags are passed out.
In some cities, the municipal adult education school, Komvux, provides instruction; elsewhere, it is provided through other organisations and companies.
In some cities, there are special HIV clinics; they are listed in the Blue Pages of the telephone directory.
In some congregations, the couple may also receive the official blessing of their church.
In some places, a special welcome is extended to people who have become Swedish citizens during the year.
In some places, the icecap was up to three kilometres thick.
In such cases, the staff member is no longer bound by confidentiality and is expected to report his or her suspicions.
In such cases, you can approach a lawyer and receive help with the costs under the Legal Aid Act, rättshjälp.
In such circumstances, too, a certain period of notice is applicable.
In such situations, the family guidance counsellor tries to help the spouses divorce with a minimum of rancour.
In Sweden, a funeral fee is paid through the income tax system.
In Sweden, almost all children are born in hospital.
In Sweden as elsewhere, the law lays down both rights and obligations and stipulates what is prohibited.
In Sweden, certain days of the year are flag days, flaggdagar.
In Sweden, efforts are made to award joint custody wherever possible.
In Sweden, it is illegal to refuse to rent someone a flat on grounds of skin colour, religious creed or country of origin.
In Sweden, it is possible to donate organs, donera organ, and tissue for transplantation to another person.
In Sweden, it is your obligation to know these regulations.
In Sweden, Lucia is celebrated everywhere as a bearer of light, especially in schools, day nurseries, old-age homes and workplaces, and also in certain churches and associations.
In Sweden, school attendance is compulsory; children between 7 and 16 years of age must attend.
In the beginning of the twentieth century, women wore full-length skirts.
In the beginning of this period, trade across the Baltic Sea was very important.
In the case of another king, Gustaf III, there is no doubt that he was murdered.
In the case of foreign citizens, special rules may sometimes apply to dissolution of marriage.
In the early months of the year, you may notice a special pastry in the windows of bakeries.
In the larger Swedish cities there are shops where you can buy meat from ritually slaughtered sheep and cattle.
In the late twentieth century, Swedish pop and rock music grew into an important export industry.
In the latter case, the murderer may have been paid by a person or group hoping to gain power once the king was out of the way, or who wanted to put an end to a war that Sweden at any rate seemed to be losing.
In the mid-twentieth century, many people immigrated from southern Europe to work in Swedish industry, which then needed manpower.
In the middle of Advent, on 13 December, comes Lucia day, Luciadagen, when Lucia brings light in the darkness.
In the morning, many people like to go out and pick flowers and leaves to decorate the maypole, midsommarstången.
In the nineteenth century, the old parliament with its four estates was replaced by a bicameral parliament.
In the past century, the language has been influenced greatly by films, radio and television, and now by the Internet.
In the past, people rode to the julotta in horse-drawn sleighs with jingling bells.
In the Roman Catholic church, her saint’s day is celebrated on this day.
In the 1970s, it was replaced by today’s single-chamber parliament.
In the school curriculum, this is called personal relationship instruction.
In the spring, you file a tax return for the previous year.
In the Swedish ecclesiastical calendar, it is a celebration of the day Jesus left the earth and rose up to heaven.
In the winter, there was a midvinterblot*, when animals were sacrificed to the gods and the celebrants then feasted on the remains.
In their large ships, the Vikings voyaged west to France, England, Iceland and Greenland, and east to the Black Sea and Caspian Sea, to Istanbul and Baghdad.
In these classes, children study both Swedish and the most important school subjects.
In these courts, the decision-makers are not solely legally trained judges.
In this chapter, we discuss some common Swedish traditions.
In this chapter, we discuss the rules that apply when you rent a flat or house, and other types of housing in Sweden.
In this chapter we present the post-secondary programmes which are either state financed or free of charge for the student.
In this chapter, we will take a look at some of the cultural and leisure activities available in Sweden.
In this way, they too serve as employment offices of a sort.
In twenty years, the number of Muslims in the country has increased from 10,000 to 250,000.
In waking reality?
Income support, försörjningsstöd, which was previously known as socialbidrag, or social welfare, is also a municipal responsibility.
Income support is not granted automatically; it is considered on an individual basis.
Income support is not intended to be a longterm solution; it is a temporary stopgap.
Inconvenient working hours, obekväm arbetstid, are hours scheduled in the evening, at night and at the weekend.
Independent schools receive municipal grant money.
Industrial labour was hard and poorly paid, and the workers joined together in labour unions to fight for better conditions.
Industrialisation, Industrialiseringen, which we mentioned previously, began in earnest during this period.
Inexpensive second-hand seats are available.
Information can be obtained from the county administrative board.
Information is also available from the National Swedish Association for Sexual Information, the RFSU, and the Swedish Federation for Gay and Lesbian Rights, the RFSL.
Information on weddings in other religious communities is available from the communities themselves.
Information on your education, previous work experience and the type of employment you are interested in are entered in the Employment Office’s database, and you gain access to a variety of services.
Initially, these existed only as an oral tradition.
Inner and outer boundaries opening up Today, we are painfully aware that that was the wrong approach, that the dream of a society based on everyone’s similarity can easily turn into a nightmare.
Instead, it must seek to unite culturally distinct values with culturally blind societal institutions, to bridge cultural differences with cross-cultural justice.
Instead, they do their best to get families back on track by providing an assistant caseworker or contact family holding support discussions and providing other forms of help.
Instruction at universities, universitet, and other institutions of higher learning, högskolor, is free.
Instruction is free, but you pay for food and housing.
Instruction may thus be provided in a variety of forms, depending on who you are and the nature of your opportunities and needs.
Insurance Home insurance, hemförsäkring, covers all the things in your home.
Interchurch cooperative efforts are termed ecumenical, ekumenik.
Interpreters are tested in various ways before they receive interpreting jobs, and certified interpreters have special identification.
Interpreters Even if you have learned quite a bit of Swedish, there may be occasions during your initial period in Sweden when you need the help of an interpreter.
Introduction objectives Following completion of the introduction, a new arrival should be established in Swedish working life and social life.
Iranians and Vietnamese also have their own new year celebrations.
Is day-care available for your children – and what does it cost?
Is it because everything is different this time?
Is it because we’re refugees now?
Is this the way it is?
It also appears on a sign in my building’s laundry room:
It also compensates you for certain expenses you would otherwise have to pay yourself, such as patient fees at the hospital and treatment by a physiotherapist.
It also contains addresses and tips on finding good, up-to-date information on the web.
It also includes income support, försörjningsstöd, previously known as social allowance, socialbidrag, which is provided to those without wages or other income.
It also makes it easier to make new friends and let others get to know you if you can understand and speak the language.
It also takes longer for newly arrived families to familiarise themselves with Swedish society.
It always falls on the first Sunday after the first full moon after the spring equinox, vårdagjämningen*, on 20 March.
It always includes instruction in the Swedish language and information on Swedish society.
It can be expensive to buy a co-operative flat, and even more expensive to buy a free-standing or terraced house.
It cannot assume an unwritten ethnic and cultural affinity as the basis for social solidarity.
It constitutes society’s response to protecting those who are sick, functionally disabled or unemployed, or who are having other problems, and whose families cannot solve the problems on their own.
It costs nothing to attend a nine-year compulsory school or upper-secondary school.
It costs nothing to get married in the Church of Sweden if you are a church member and one member of the couple is census registered in the parish where the wedding is to be held.
It doesn’t have to be perfect.
It had so much light, so many people.
It has become popular for children and young people to dress up as witches and skeletons and light candles in carved pumpkins.
It is a good idea to memorise your personal identification number, as public authorities, banks and other organisations will often ask for it.
It is a good idea to submit notice in writing and save a copy – then you can be sure there will not be any misunderstanding.
It is a good idea to think twice about whether you really need the thing being sold or are simply being swept along because the salesperson seems so convincing.
It is administered free of charge, and you do not have to give your name.
It is also a good time to ask about things you may wonder about.
It is also important to be familiar with traffic regulations.
It is also important to have the receipt in case you discover the item is defective.
It is also possible for students to pursue an individual programme, individuella program, with its own curriculum.
It is also prohibited to drive after taking drugs and certain medicines.
It is always up to the newspaper owner or publisher to decide what will be published, however.
It is better to ask one too many questions than one too few.
It is eaten with boiled potatoes and the traditional thin bread of Norrland.
It is illegal to beat your wife, husband or children.
It is illegal to discriminate against a person on grounds of sex, skin colour, creed or national origin, or to pay lower wages or treat someone less favourably because he or she is of another ethnic background.
It is important to calculate whether you can actually afford to buy the property so that you are not forced to move out after just a year or two.
It is important to make sure that an inspection report is written up, otherwise you may be liable for damage caused by the previous tenant.
It is important to pay on time, otherwise you risk being evicted, bli vräkt forced to vacate the flat.
It is intended as a guarantee that all elderly people receive a certain minimum sum to live on every month.
It is intended to be an asset for all new residents of Sweden.
It is 500 kilometres wide and stretches 1,600 kilometres from north to south, with a surface area of 450,000 square kilometres.
It is legal to have an abortion, abort*, in Sweden.
It is Lucia approaching with her cohort of attendants.
It is no longer particularly common for a couple to have shared work, such as a farm or business.
It is not accepted by everyone, but it is nevertheless common.
It is not the mission of family guidance counsellors to keep families together regardless of the circumstances.
It is often called Swedish for Immigrants, or SFI.
It is often said that Sweden is a land of high taxes, and it’s true that taxes are higher in Sweden than in many other countries.
It is possible that the similarities seemed greater than they really were.
It is presented as a gift to all who are granted a permanent residence permit in Sweden.
It is prohibited to drive after drinking wine, beer or spirits.
It is the job of the courts, domstolarna, to apply the law and determine who is right in a conflict.
It is therefore generally possible to do so if there are enough children in an area who speak a given native language.
It is toll-free and will not show up as a call to a women’s shelter on your telephone bill.
It is up to students to decide, often in consultation with teachers and parents, which upper-secondary school programme suits them best.
It is up to the authority in question to engage and pay for an interpreter.
It is up to the municipal authorities to decide who is entitled to färdtjänst.
It is up to the parents to decide whether their children will attend a pre-school class, but all children are entitled to attend.
It is up to the woman to decide whether to abort a foetus.
It is up to your physician to evaluate the extent of your sick-listing.
It just looks that way.”
It looked ridiculous.
It may be a good idea to do so anyway, however, as good test results improve your chances of acceptance.
It may be difficult in the case of unusual languages, however.
It may take a long time for the decision to be made.
It may therefore be punishable to break a rule even if you did not know it existed.
It may thus be better to check the Internet or consult an educational adviser.
It must succeed in disabusing itself of the notion that diversity is a passing unpleasantness.
It must succeed in instilling the idea, in a majority of its citizens, that difference and diversity are permanent and essentially enriching conditions.
It proves that Sweden is a country that is not afraid to acknowledge those who are weak and need protection.
It receives a great deal of snow in the winter.
It serves to guarantee that all students have access to the same basic knowledge, no matter where they live.
It should always be treated, as an infection can make it difficult for a woman to become pregnant later in life.
It should be combined with practical experience, so that new arrivals have a chance to learn the everyday language skills needed at a place of work.
It states that the majority of documents drawn up by public authorities must be accessible to all who ask to see them.
It stretched from approximately 800 to 1050 AD.
It takes about 30 seconds for your doom to be sealed.
It took about five years before I stopped being bothered by typically Swedish things that I thought were ridiculous.
It typically takes three to four months for a child to be assigned a place.
It usually costs more to go to a hospital casualty ward than it does to go to a healthcare centre.
It was a safe street.
It was also important to have children, perhaps to take over the family farm and eventually take care of their aged parents.
It was just that nobody had noticed.
It’s best to call first and speak with the nurse in charge of the clinic, mottagningen*.
It’s odd, actually, that the laundry room makes as big a difference as it does in Sweden.
It’s only three!
Its characteristic feature is an emphasis on personal apprehension of the presence of God.
Its population, on the other hand, is not particularly large, just under 9 million.
Its representatives can provide information on Swedish rules and regulations.
Its size depends on how much you have earned and how much tax you have paid in Sweden.
Jobseeker courses, jobbsökarkurser, provide practical advice on matters such as how to write a letter of application to an employer and how to prepare for an employment interview, anställningsintervju*.
Joint meetings are sometimes arranged for the parents of all the children at the school.
Jolin Boldt is the editor of Sesam, a magazine for new residents of Sweden.
Jolly Christmastime is through, through, through the Christmas tree is going out, out, out But next year again he’ll be back, our dear old friend, and he’ll keep his promise.
Judging by their numbers, you might imagine that most people attend church on Sunday and are otherwise active believers.
Just a few days after the New Year’s celebration comes Epiphany, or Twelfth Day, Trettondedag jul.
Just as a new country came into being in Sweden a century ago.
Just as many work in the care sector, omsorg*, and as many again work in commerce, transportation and service.
Just as people’s traditions may change when they move to a new country, the new country may be affected by the culture of new arrivals.
Just over a third work in what is usually termed the public sector, offentliga sektorn.
Just to be on the safe side.
Killing is always prohibited, even for the state: there is no capital punishment in Sweden.
Kings and other wealthy men donated land for monasteries and churches.
Komvux issues grades just like compulsory schools and upper-secondary schools.
Kosher shops, selling traditional Jewish foods, have operated here for many years.
KY programmes are the most practically oriented post-secondary programmes.
Labour unions have historically been stronger in Sweden than in many other countries and have had close ties to the government over long periods of time.
Labourers were the mainstay voters of the Social Democrats, who wanted to help those who were worst off.
Land reforms were carried out, industrialism took wing.
Landlords are not entitled to raise the rent for normal maintenance jobs.
Landlords do not generally mind your doing so as long as the job is properly done and you do not choose unusual colours (that might make it difficult to rent the flat to someone else).
Landlords, hyresvärdar, may make various demands of prospective tenants.
Landlords often have their own queues for people wanting a flat.
Language instruction Instruction in the Swedish language for new arrivals who are 16 or over is provided in all municipalities.
Language is an important key to Swedish society, to the labour market and to participation in schools, associations, sports – essentially everything.
Large municipalities usually have several municipal commissioners, kommunalråd, in their employ.
Larger cities have separate art and other museums, including those devoted to topics such as technology and history.
Lasse Hallström is now making movies in the USA.
Late autumn draped down under the streetlights, fogging the view.
Later, additional rules were introduced governing paid holidays, child allowances, general pensions, etc.
Later, around 1500 BC, bronze objects began being made.
Later in the evening, there may be dancing for the adults.
Later sections concern taxes and some of the things your taxes are used for: pensions, child allowances, etc.
205 Law and order Sweden’s efforts to promote justice
159 Learning more Folk high schools and universities
Leases If you and a landlord have agreed you can rent a flat, you should receive a written contract, a lease, hyreskontrakt.
“Leave the laundry room in the condition you would like to find it.”
Legal aid does not cover your opponent’s expenses, however, which you may be required to pay if you lose the case.
Legal aid never covers the expenses of the opposite party, however, which you may be required to pay if you lose a civil case.
Libraries have special children’s departments that arrange story hours and other activities.
Libraries stock talking books and Braille books for the visually impaired.
Lights shining when darkness has fallen.
Like a doctor’s appointment, you must cancel a dental appointment if you find you will be unable to come, otherwise you will still have to pay.
Like breakfast.
Lint is caught by the lint filter.
Lint is like our old sins – a grey, diffuse, unappetising tangle.
Literally everything.
Long ago, during the last Ice Age, istiden, all of what is now Sweden was covered by ice.
Long before these modern-day immigrants arrived, the Russian Orthodox Church was established here in the seventeenth century.
Look under the heading Familjerådgivning in the Yellow Pages of the telephone directory.
Lucia was a Christian virgin in Syracuse who was martyred in 304 during Caesar Diocletian’s persecution of the Christians.
Lucia wears a crown of candles on her head.
Luxury is relative.
Major organisations often visit ministers and public authorities to voice their opinions on issues affecting their area.
Major problems also result when “black” employment is discovered.
Major white-collar labour organisations include the Swedish Union of Clerical and Technical Employees in Industry, SIF, and the Swedish Federation of Civil Servants, ST.
Make an appointment in advance and bring along the appropriate documentation of your finances – pay slips, bank statements, rent bills, housing allowance statements, etc.
Many answer that they like to get out into the countryside, go fishing, walk their dog or simply stroll about.
Many are run by associations, popular movements, folkrörelser*, or county councils.
Many available positions at private companies are never advertised; instead, they are filled through personal contacts.
Many came here during the nineteenth-century pogroms in Russia and eastern Europe.
Many cities hold a special summer festival.
Many consider that the Sami were the first people to come to northern Sweden.
Many county councils have specially trained personnel who can help people who have gone through such traumatic experiences.
Many couples get married on Whitsun Eve.
Many families consist of just one parent and children, or two adults without children.
Many folk high schools have a special focus, such as music, theatre or religious activities.
Many folk high schools offer courses especially for immigrants.
Many jobs require both education and language skills.
Many municipalities have special services for old people with foreign backgrounds.
Many music schools have their own orchestras and choirs.
Many parents also take the opportunity to talk to the staff when they pick up their children in the afternoon.
Many parents are married, while others live together as sambor, a word compounded from the Swedish words for “live together”.
Many people also pay for private pension insurance, as discussed earlier.
Many people feel dental care is expensive.
Many people moved from the country to the cities, which grew ever larger.
Many people study languages this way.
Many people usually watch films on television or video.
Many people who live by themselves feel especially lonely at Christmas, when families and relatives get together to celebrate.
Many people who work full-time during the week do their laundry and cleaning on the weekend.
Many public authorities operate in Sweden; some are very large, while others are quite small.
Many schools also have a school social worker, skolkurator, and a school psychologist, skolpsykolog, whom students can contact if they have problems.
Many schools have special parents’ councils where a few parents, a few teachers and the headmaster meet.
Many short subjects, kortfilm, and documentaries, dokumentärfilm, are produced in Sweden, too.
Many small exhibitions are mounted around the country, especially during the summer months.
Many subjects, both theoretical and practical, are available, such as ceramics and furniture-making.
Many Swedes now spend their holidays abroad, especially around the Mediterranean, and so have become aware of the cuisines of other countries.
Many Swedes who consider themselves Christians are not active in their parish church.
Many Swedish industrial companies are now owned by major international companies.
Many Swedish regulations, including those governing customs and border control, have therefore been adapted to conform to EU norms.
70 Maps
Marijuana, hashish and kat are classed as narcotics.
Mark Olson is a journalist from the USA.
Maternity clinics are usually situated at the same place as ordinary healthcare centres.
Maybe a glorious song can rise up from cheerful neighbours gathered round the laundry mangle.
Maybe friendship can flower in the laundry room.
Maybe I could assure him that I usually clean the lint filter.
Maybe my neighbour and I can become the best of friends once the centrifuge winds down, look upon one another in all our common humanity.
Maybe pure Swedish wool can be mixed with Egyptian cotton, white mixed with colours.
Maypoles are different in different regions.
Meetings are open to the public, so you can go and listen if you want to.
Membership in the European Union (EU) has also forged closer links between Sweden and other countries.
Men might need someone to manage the household and help with work on the farm.
Midsummer, then, is a major holiday, and if it rains on Midsummer Eve everyone who wanted to celebrate outdoors is disappointed.
Money and day-to-day finances
More and more people have begun to eat more vegetarian food, and many new dishes have been introduced by immigrants from other countries.
More immigrants than Swedes start companies when they are unemployed, and, today, one out of every five new companies in Sweden was founded by a person with a foreign background.
More information is available on the The National Board of Student Aid website or from the educational advisers at the schools and universities.
More information is provided later in this chapter.
More information on eligibility and institutions of higher learning can be found later in this chapter.
More information on homes for the aged can be found later in this chapter.
More information on post-secondary education can be found in the next chapter.
More information on these topics can be found later in this chapter.
More information on unemployment benefit funds can be found later in this chapter.
Morning after pills are non-prescription drugs, receptfritt*, sold at pharmacies and available from youth health centres.
Mornings and evenings grow darker.
Most associations are registered, since many are eligible for municipal grants to support their activities.
Most associations have a permanent organisational structure, with governing boards, annual meetings and reports of their proceedings.
Most compulsory schools and upper-secondary schools are municipally run.
Most foreign citizens who have been granted a residence permit can become Swedish citizens after five years’ residence in Sweden.
Most grocery items also have information on ingredients on the label.
Most have one main library and one or more branch libraries.
Most medicines that affect your ability to operate a car show a red triangle on the package.
Most occupationally oriented degrees require at least three years of study.
Most of Sweden’s national museums are in Stockholm, such as the Nationalmuseum and Moderna Museet, the museum of modern art.
Most of the legal provisions applicable to marriage also apply to partnership.
Most parents choose joint custody, since they want to take equal responsibility for the children and spend as much time with them as possible.
Most people are infected by unprotected sexual intercourse, but the virus is also transmitted by needles and blood.
Most people have to borrow money from a bank to make the purchase.
Most people live in the southern part of the country, while large parts of northern Sweden are entirely unpopulated.
Most pre-schools are municipally run, with a staff employed by the municipality.
Most schools have a parents’ association, föräldraförening, whose board is in contact with the school administration.
Most schools serve school lunch, skollunch, free of charge.
Most work separately.
Mother can barely walk.
Multicultural festivals are also growing increasingly popular, bringing together people of various nationalities to enjoy one another’s music, dance and theatre.
Municipal residents decide which politicians will serve on the municipal council by voting in a municipal election, kommunalvalet.
Municipal social services then step in to help with co-operative discussions, samarbetssamtal.
Municipal taxes, kommunalskatt, are paid by all municipal residents who have an income.
Municipalities and county councils are discussed in the chapter on The Municipality.
Municipalities and county councils are not government authorities.
Municipalities and county councils provide most of the services Swedish residents receive for their tax money, such as childcare, schools, care of the elderly, and healthcare.
Municipalities are not permitted to charge more than the services cost to provide, however.
Municipalities are required to arrange such instruction and guidance counselling if the expense is not too great.
Municipalities, county councils, churches and associations often have special clinics for substance abusers.
Municipalities have great significance in Sweden.
Municipalities often have a family counselling department, and family guidance counsellors can also be found through the Church of Sweden, the county councils and private consultants.
Municipalities vary greatly in size.
Municipalities with low income and high expenses may receive more grant money than municipalities with better finances.
Muslim congregations and associations are especially common in southern central Sweden.
Muslims in Sweden have introduced many to Ramadan, the month of fasting.
My cheeks redden.
My family was waiting.
My first year, I did everything wrong.
My good name is at stake here.
My lint, and it’s still there.
My neighbour holds it up for inspection: the entire surface is covered with the lint of sin.
My neighbour waves the fluffy evidence in my face.
Myrorna can be found in many Swedish cities.
Name days are not so commonly observed.
Nearly every fifth person The most common country of origin for people born abroad is Finland.
Networks, nätverk, are more informal structures, linking people with the same profession or interests.
Nevertheless, it is usually a good idea to get a check-up once a year.
Nevertheless, many people take out insurance policies so as to get more than the guaranteed minimum in the event that anything should happen.
New regulations may have taken effect since then; information on any changes can be obtained from the Employment Office and other places.
Nice cars.
Nor can it assume that its citizens have more or less the same values and preferences.
Nor is it uncommon to see little brownies and gingerbread men in the procession.
Nor may a father and daughter or mother and son marry.
Nor may the total charges be so high that the resident does not have a certain amount of money left per month.
Nor more pleasant either.
Northernmost Sweden has also always been home to many Finns, as have parts of central Sweden.
Norway and Island, which are not EU member states, have also signed the agreement.
Not all family problems have to lead to divorce.
Not mine.
Not so long ago, there were other reasons that were sometimes more important.
Not such a bad place to live at all.
Notification is sent out when it is time for a check-up.
Now, after 25 years, I feel I have a fairly good understanding of things Swedish.
Now, every time a car drove by and I heard its whistling, I rolled over in my sleep, unconscious and listless, right out under the bed.
Now is the time to start thinking about Christmas presents, julklappar, and send Christmas cards, julkort, to friends and acquaintances.
Now it’s Christmas again, now it’s Christmas again, and Christmas lasts right up to Easter!
Nowadays, it’s not hard to find something for most tastes at restaurants.
Nowadays, they are usually electric.
Nowadays, two adults of the same sex can live together in a registered partnership.
Occasionally, they make guest appearances elsewhere in the country.
Of residents born abroad, approximately a third come from the other Nordic countries, a third from the rest of Europe and a third from countries outside Europe.
Officials of a public authority must be non-partisan, opartiska*, and follow the laws and regulations governing how the authority is expected to operate.
Often, a member or members of the family may be away at various evening activities.
Often, each child is given a bag of sweets.
Often, the church sided with power.
Often these ideas are based on faith, whether they spring from our own particular beliefs or a belief system shared by many.
Often, you thus need to take an active part in securing help with the services to which you are entitled.
Oh dear.
Old-age pension Sweden’s pension system is a security system intended to ensure that those who have passed the age of retirement have something to live on.
Older students are expected themselves to be able to tell their parents what is going on at school.
On Easter Sunday, hymns of celebration are sung in the churches in memory of Jesus’ resurrection from the dead.
On major holidays such as Christmas and Easter, families often meet, as they do on birthdays and special occasions, such as christenings, graduations or funerals.
On television, they talked about how immigrants had to adapt, integrate, be educated.
On the Employment Office’s website, you will find a Vacancies Bank, listing positions available, a Jobseekers Bank, where you can enter your own particulars, and, under Yrken A–Ö, a description of various professions and occupations.
On the last day of school, breaking-up, skolavslutning, is celebrated; different schools have their own traditions.
215 On the road Taking to the Swedish roads by car
Once children start school, school nurses and physicians provide the necessary healthcare.
Once home, families serve food and drink to relatives and friends.
Once the car is registered, you will receive a registration certificate indicating that you are the owner.
Once the children get older, many schools stop sending out weekly newsletters.
Once the children have learned enough to keep up with ordinary instruction, they are transferred to regular classes.
Once the maypole is decorated it must be raised, often by a few strong men to a chorus of lusty cheers, and during the afternoon there is ring-dancing round the pole.
Once the reconciliation period is over, they must file for a decree absolute, which will make the divorce final.
Once they are married, a man and woman together make decisions regarding the disposal of their property and debts.
Once they can handle the language well enough, they transfer to the regular classes.
Once you begin to feel comfortable with the language, it is only natural to have questions about everyday life in Sweden.
Once you have been granted a residence permit, the next step into Swedish society is to be registered in the census rolls, folkbokförd.
One event that galvanised attention both in Sweden and abroad was the murder of Prime Minister Olof Palme in 1986.
One famous Swedish king is Gustavus Adolphus II, who took part in the Thirty Years’ War in Germany.
One is that a municipality may not charge more for its services than they cost to provide.
One is the vaginal smear, cellprov, or Pap test, cytologprov, which is intended to discover cervical cancer early enough to permit easy treatment.
One of the best known is the Falun folk music festival, which attracts musicians from around the world.
One of the purposes of Sweden’s taxes is to guarantee everyone a certain minimum standard of living, even if you fall ill or experience other problems.
One once common springtime tradition that has now practically disappeared is “Singing in May” at the beginning of May.
One such court is the Labour Court, Arbetsdomstolen, which handles disputes between employers and employees.
One such law prohibits all parents and adults from beating, threatening or harassing children.
One such organisation is Abrahams barn för religiös and kulturell samexistens, which emphasises the similarities between Christianity, Judaism and Islam.
One week after the “Swedish” new year, the new year is celebrated according to the Orthodox Christian tradition.
Only a few MPs have immigrant backgrounds.
Only men could sit in parliament – women were not granted political power until the twentieth century.
Only wealthy farmers and city dwellers could sit in Parliament, and the King still had great power.
Ordinary residence permits, uppehållstillstånd, UT, are granted to foreign students who are studying in Sweden.
Other common responses are that they commit some of their leisure time to an association, or that they exercise or take part in sports, or spend time with their children.
Other eastern churches represented here are the Armenian Apostolic Church, and the Ethiopian, Coptic and Eritrean Orthodox Churches.
Other free churches in Sweden include the Seventh-Day Adventists, Sjundedags Adventistsamfundet, the Methodists, Metodistkyrkan, the Baptists, Baptistsamfundet, the Alliansmissionen and InterAct, Nybygget-Kristen samverkan.
Other important words include equality, jämställdhet*, between the sexes and taking a stand against bullying and racist behaviour.
Other items such as sickness benefits, unemployment benefits, parents’ allowance, study periods, child-rearing and compulsory military service, värnplikt*, are also factored in in various ways.
Other legislation states that no-one may receive worse treatment on grounds of their sex, religion, ethnic origins, etniskt ursprung*, or sexual orientation, sexuell läggning*.
Other municipal politicians are active in their free time.
Other vehicles There are many other ways of getting from place to place.
Others consider him one of history’s losers, for it was during his reign that the Swedish Era of Great Power came to an end and Sweden lost much of its territory.
Others have a religious affiliation.
Others have been agreed on by employers’ organisations and the labour unions through collective bargaining, förhandlingar*.
Others have bought a house or a flat in a tenant-owner association.
Others include the Network for Friendship and Tolerance between People of Different Faiths, Nätverket för vänskap and tolerans mellan människor av olika tro, the Nordic centre for dialogue between religions, Stiftelsen Nordiskt center för interreligiös dialog, and the Multi Faith Rådgivningen, which takes an interest in family issues within the major religions.
Others left Sweden, seeking a better future in another country.
Otherwise, we live our family lives in our flats.
Otherwise, you will have to pay a fee, which varies from parish to parish.
Otherwise, your unemployment benefits may be discontinued.
Our vision is a society in which human value is more important than market value and everyone has the right to a job.
Over a million Swedes emigrated during the nineteenth century, the great majority going to North America.
Over half a million people spend some of their leisure time singing in a choir.
Over half of the residents born abroad have become Swedish citizens.
Over 1.5 million people live in greater Stockholm.
Over 250 pages filled with useful information on the country that will be your new home.
Overtime must not exceed a total of 50 hours per month.
Packages that have been opened may not be exchanged.
Palme was shot in Stockholm one evening as he walked home from the cinema.
Parents’ allowance Parents’ allowance, föräldrapenning, is available to parents so that they can stay at home with their children for a certain period.
Parents are liable to support children who are still attending compulsory school or upper-secondary school up to the age of 21.
Parents are liable to support their children until they have reached the age of 18.
Parents are usually included in the lower grades.
Parents may also feel the need to discuss the school and their children with other parents.
Parents of sick children or children with functional disabilities may be eligible for a care allowance, vårdbidrag, to finance home care of the child.
Parents should apply to their municipality if they need a place at pre-school.
Parents, teachers, children and politicians often voice their opinion on the curriculum and make proposals as to how it could be changed.
Parents usually want more contact with the school than just an occasional developmental conversation.
Parents who are at home with their children during the day can accompany their children to an open pre-school.
Parents who work or study are also welcome whenever they can spare the time.
Parents with a native language other than Swedish are entitled to an interpreter during developmental conversations.
Patients’ associations, patientföreningar, exist to help people with a particular disease or disability.
Paying tax The salary you and your employer agree on is known as your gross salary, bruttolön.
Pea soup, Lucia, common access, “sj”, Papa, Mama, baby sister.
Pea soup, Santa Lucia, the right of common access, that tricky “sj” sound, Papa, Mama, baby sister...
Pension insurance, pensionsförsäkring, gives you more money to live on when you grow old.
Pensioners may be entitled to a special grant known as a municipal housing supplementary allowance, bostadstillägg.
People also burn wax candles at home in special holders for four candles.
People born between 1938 and 1953 receive pensions according to both the new system and the former system.
People dance to traditional Swedish songs.
People from other countries often think Swedish bread is too sweet.
People gather around a bonfire, valborgsmässobål.
People have picked up words while travelling, or from books and magazines; words are brought by visitors and immigrants.
People in many countries are familiar with the Swedish director Ingmar Bergman.
People over 20 have to pay for dental care.
People over 25 who have worked for four years and have Swedish and English skills corresponding to upper-secondary school level are also eligible under the “25:4” rule.
People started to turn away.
People thus preferred to travel by boat along lakes and rivers whenever possible.
People who are over 65 when they come to Sweden are not eligible for an old-age pension.
People who come here from the world’s densely populated areas are often surprised to discover that you can spend hours in the forest without meeting another soul.
People who have experienced war and torture often have psychiatric symptoms such as sleeping problems, nightmares and anxiety long afterwards.
Permanent tenure, tillsvidareanställning, or a permanent position, fast arbete, is the most secure form of employment.
Personal accident insurance, olycksfallsförsäkring, for example, provides you with benefits if you should have an accident that results in disability.
Pharmacies can provide you with a list of them.
Physiotherapists help people retrain their bodies following an illness or injury, and occupational therapists provide patients with training to help them deal with work or other everyday tasks.
Physiotherapy, sjukgymnastik, and occupational therapy, arbetsterapi, are also sometimes provided within the system.
Pleasure, you could say.
Political decisions lead to the adoption of legislation and rules, which in turn govern public authorities and their officials.
Political parties were established, too.
Political speeches are held by representatives of the Social Democrats and the Left Party.
Popular movements, folkrörelser, generally refers to organisations that operate nation-wide and have many members.
Power plants have already been built on several other northern rivers and supply a great deal of electricity.
Practical training positions, arbetspraktik, also last for six months and give participants an opportunity of testing their skills at a place of work.
Pre-school co-operates with parents, who have an important role to play in child care.
Pre-schools and schools often employ the services of psychologists and school welfare officers, whom you may consult if you wish.
Pregnant women receive free check-ups at maternity clinics, and the father-to-be is welcome to come along, too.
Preparations begin early in December.
Pressed the button and opened the door.
Previously, fees, avgifterna, for child care and care of schoolchildren varied widely from municipality to municipality.
Prior to the election, you can find out what the politicians of the various parties want to do locally in newspapers and information fliers.
Prison sentences are generally between two weeks and ten years, but the court may sentence an offender to life imprisonment in extreme cases.
Private health insurance, sjukförsäkring, gives you more to live on if you fall ill, and life insurance, livförsäkring, gives the rest of your family money if you should die.
Private people often raise the flag at home when someone is celebrating a birthday.
Probation, skyddstillsyn, is a type of suspended sentence with a trial period of three years.
Programmes for which there are many applicants relative to the number of places available, such as those in medicine and computer engineering, require good grades or excellent results in the national university aptitude test.
project employment, projektarbete, in which one or more people are employed to carry out a specified, limited task.
Public defence counsels are paid by the state, but the defendant may be required to repay the cost of defence if he or she is convicted.
Punishing children and other family members by striking them is considered assault and battery.
Quinquagesima Sunday, fastlagssöndagen, falls sometime in February or March.
Rather than taking out the full parents’ allowance, you can withdraw three quarters, half or one quarter of the parents’ allowance and work part-time if your child can be cared for while you are working.
Reading a book or writing a story, painting a picture or going to see an artist’s work are cultural activities.
Relatives may wish to arrange the funeral themselves.
246 Religious communities in Sweden Address list
Remember to call if you are unable to keep an appointment.
Remodelling the bathroom to make it wheelchair-accessible is an example of such an alteration.
Rents and prices of houses, terraced houses and tenant-owner flats are also significantly lower there.
Report You must have lived in Sweden for a certain period, generally five years.
Resource work, resursarbete, is a type of position lasting a maximum of six months within the public sector (e.g. state, municipalities and county councils).
Respect for the values and ideas of others should be in evidence both in and out of the classroom, among students, teachers and others who work in the schools.
Responsibility for ensuring that pre-schools follow the curriculum and maintain acceptable quality always rests with the municipality.
Rinse out your cup, wash your hands, no elbows on the table.
Roads, railways and canals were built, too.
Salvation Army members often wear uniforms, and can be seen on the streets, singing the songs that have become the group’s trademark.
Sarajevo in the darkness is one of my worst wartime images.
Sausages and boiled potatoes.
School menus are often listed in the local newspaper.
Schoolchildren usually have this day off, too.
Schools should emphasise respect for our common environment.
Schools should encourage conversations between teachers and students.
See also the chapter on Family and social life.
See also the chapters on Democracy, Family and social life and Work.
See Good to know.
See Good to know about what to do if you disagree.
See Good to know at the end of this chapter.
See more below under notice of dismissal.
See the chapter on Democracy.
See the chapter on Money.
See the drawing illustrating the structure of the courts and how to lodge an appeal.
See the Good to know section at the end of the chapter.
See under Good to know at the end of this chapter.
Semlor start filling the bakery shelves early nowadays, but traditionally they are associated with Lent, which falls later in the year.
Several groups, such as ABBA and Roxette, gained followings around the world.
Several times a term they get together for reviews and exams.
Several university colleges currently provide a one or two term introduction to studies.
Sexual intercourse with persons under the age of 15 is prohibited.
She almost slipped on the crowded pavement.
She looked at things she would be leaving behind: dresses, shoes, ordinary things in the display windows.
She opened her umbrella.
She really ought to feel sorry for everyone who didn’t come from Sweden.
She really ought to feel sorry for him.
She should be nice to him.
She snuffled at the skies.
She watched him ineffectually shielding his head with a give-away newspaper.
She, with her illness, was sentenced to death; I, in my flight, to life.
Shops have a special Christmas window-display day, julskyltningsdag, at the beginning of the period, and many Swedes head into town to view the Christmas displays.
Shops that do not permit customers to buy on a sale or return basis will sometimes give the customer the right to exchange the item for something else in the shop.
Short prison sentences may sometimes be served at home.
Shortly after the Stockholm bloodbath, a rebellion began against Christian II, led by a young nobleman named Gustav Vasa who travelled the country inciting the Swedish people to rise up against Danish rule.
Similarly, anyone believing person he or she has been discriminated against in the workplace on grounds of race, skin colour, religious belief or national or ethnic origin can report the matter to the Ombudsman against Ethnic Discrimination, Ombudsmannen mot etnisk diskriminering, or DO.
Simple food.
Simply remember to renew your certificate if it expires while you are out of the country.
Since 1995, Sweden has been a member of the European Union (EU).
Since Sweden has had Christian traditions for 1000 years, much of the chapter is devoted to the various branches of Christianity.
Since the mid-seventies, many refugees have immigrated to Sweden, fleeing war and political persecution.
Since then, Sweden’s borders have been as they are today.
Since there is more wear and tear on a flat if more people live there, the landlord may not approve of their moving in.
Six year olds usually attend an affiliated pre-school, förskoleklass, where they can prepare for compulsory school.
Slightly older children attending pre-school or school classes are provided with child care at recreation centres or family day nursery.
Social Democrats and Left Party members are usually considered to be on the left, Moderates and Christian Democrats on the right, and Liberals and Centre Party members in the centre.
Some are intended for television.
Some books, films and cassettes in foreign languages are also available.
Some can attain citizenship even earlier.
Some care, such as that provided for children and pregnant women, is entirely free of charge.
Some children attend a family day nursery after school.
Some consider him a warrior and hero who defended Swedish honour and fought the Russians.
Some countries accept only one form of marriage for their citizens.
Some Estonian, Finnish, Iranian, Chinese and Korean immigrants have brought their churches with them.
Some families give each other presents on name days, while others pay them no attention at all.
Some families see each other often, others more seldom.
Some free-standing and terraced houses are also set up as co-operative units.
Some goods, such as watches and VCRs, usually come with a warranty, garanti, valid for one or two years.
Some have a religious affiliation.
Some have established special sections within Sweden’s free churches, while others have established their own congregations.
Some independent schools are much like the municipal schools, while others employ special pedagogy.
Some jobs are very shortterm – a month or just a few hours a week – and some are longer term.
Some major national associations are called interest groups, intresseorganisationer; their primary objective is to promote the economic interests of their members.
Some may live with a new partner.
Some municipalities also provide an introduction for new arrivals who are not refugees.
Some municipalities have a local housing authority that helps people find housing.
Some municipalities have preschools where the children learn several languages.
Some municipalities have voluntarily taken on similar responsibility for unemployed young people between the ages of 20 and 24.
Some municipalities operate their own housing companies and power companies.
Some municipalities pay introductory benefits, introduktionsersättning, during this period, while others provide income support, försörjningsstöd.
Some municipalities take on additional duties as well, such as provision of leisure and cultural activities.
Some of the largest municipalities are styled city rather than municipality, as for example the City of Stockholm, Stockholms stad.
Some people also receive an extra pension negotiated between employers and employees.
Some people enjoy learning new things in their leisure time.
Some people feel that sport is culture, too.
Some people get up early for a gökotta – a dawn picnic in the countryside.
Some 75 per cent of all children born in Sweden are baptised, döpta, in the Church of Sweden and thus become members.
Some pre-schools employ special teaching methods, pedagogik*.
Some residents of Sweden practise religions other than those listed above, but have not organised congregations.
Some services, such as child care and geriatric care, are available to all, regardless of their economic circumstances.
Some students attend a school for the intellectually handicapped for a while then switch to a compulsory school, or vice versa.
Some, such as Stockholm, are very large, while others have just a few thousand residents.
Some, such as the Salvation Army, founded in England by William Booth, were established in other countries, then came to Sweden.
Some Swedish musicians are better known there than they are at home.
Some traditions have fallen by the wayside, while others have been adopted.
Some treatment centres primarily deal with young people.
Some university courses are now taught at a distance, på distans.
Some 70–80 years ago, it was not Father Christmas who brought the presents but the Christmas Goat.
Someone toasts the arrival of spring, and choirs – usually male – sing springtime songs.
Sometimes a small fee is charged for films and CDs.
Sometimes children use regular train or bus lines; in other cases there is a special bus or taxi.
Sometimes parents are unable to agree on joint custody.
Sometimes problems arise because the parents are sick or depressed, deprimerade*, and cannot take adequate responsibility for their children.
Sometimes, the deceased must be subjected to a post-mortem examination to determine the cause of death.
Sometimes the problems are very serious indeed: sexual abuse, childbeating or parents who abuse alcohol and drugs.
Sometimes the staff can help parents, and sometime parents can help the staff.
Sometimes there are “star-boys”, stjärngossar, too, boys dressed in white with pointed white hats decorated with gold stars.
Sometimes they took what they wanted by force; sometimes they traded furs, skins and prisoners-of-war for silver coins and objects of glass and bronze.
Sometimes you will absolutely quiver with rage.
Somewhat later, in 1921, women were also given the right to vote.
Special courts handle cases that require specialised background knowledge.
Special new year dates are observed by Sikhs, Muslims, Jews and Hindus.
Special rules apply to refugees and people from countries with which Sweden has entered into a social security agreement.
Special rules apply to those who are not Swedish citizens.
Special school medical officers, skolläkare, are affiliated to the schools.
Spectators are not entitled to participate in the discussions, however.
Standing surety for someone means accepting responsibility for someone else’s loan.
Start-up grants, starta eget-bidrag, may sometimes be available to unemployed persons for a period of six months.
Starving human bodies.
Sterilisation is a relatively simple operation.
Still, deciding to get divorced is no easy matter.
Stockholm was little more than a village at this time, while Visby on the island of Gotland was an important city with many churches and large stone buildings.
Streetlights.
Student loans are available for up to 12 terms of study.
Students and teachers together decide on its content and the approach they will take.
Students apply in writing, listing the programme they want most as their first choice, but also listing a second and third choice.
Students are usually given a menu they can take home with them, too.
Students attending a Swedish class may take part in special instruction in their native language.
Students can contact the school nurse about health problems.
Students deserve a school stressing democratic values and respect for the integrity of the individual.
Students learn more about higher education, receive training in efficient study skills and get used to working at university level.
Students live in their home towns and keep in touch with instructors by telephone and e-mail.
Students then move on to upper-secondary school, gymnasieskolan, which lasts three years.
Students who live far from their school are entitled to free school transportation, skolskjuts.
Students wishing to continue their education after upper-secondary school are eligible for study assistance, studiestöd.
Students with special dietary needs are served food that meets their requirements.
Study assistance consists of two components, a grant and a loan.
Study assistance is made up of two components, a grant and a loan.
Subleasing, att hyra i andra hand, means renting a flat on which someone else holds the lease.
Submit your application to the municipality.
Such care is usually provided on a voluntary basis, but people who represent a danger to themselves or others may be committed to compulsory care.
Such cases involve disputes, or situations in which two or more parties are unable to agree and need the help of the court to determine who is right.
Such changes may affect your housing allowance.
Such decrees will always grant joint custody of the children unless one of the parents has requested otherwise.
Such free time is called compensatory leave, kompledigt.
Such help can usually be provided even in emergency situations – there are interpreters who can work over the telephone, for example.
Such issues are also debated in Parliament, and sometimes a commission, utredning, is established.
Such mopeds can do as much as 45 km per hour and must be registered.
Such programmes can be found through newspaper advertisements or under the heading Utbildning in the Yellow Pages.
Suddenly I catch a glimpse of his watch.
Summer is important in this relatively dark, cold country.
Surströmming is fermented Baltic herring sold in cans.
Sveriges Radio (the Swedish Broadcasting Corporation) and Sveriges Television (SVT) are companies funded not by advertising or political parties but by licence fees payable by all people who have a television.
Sweden did not participate in either the First or the Second World War.
Sweden had a large army and a thriving arms industry.
Sweden has an ombudsman, HomO, charged with the prevention of discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation in any sector of Swedish public life.
Sweden has nine million residents, and one out of every five people was born in another country or has one or two parents who were.
12 Sweden in brief Geography, climate and population
Sweden instead entered into a union with Norway, but the Norwegians wanted independence and left the union in 1905.
Sweden is a democracy, in the sense that it is governed by a parliament, Riksdag, elected in free general elections.
Sweden is a democracy, meaning it is governed by its people.
Sweden is a long country, and both countryside and climate vary greatly in different parts of the country.
Sweden is a signatory of the Schengen Agreement, which encompasses all EU countries except for Great Britain and Ireland.
Sweden is a signatory of the UN’s Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Sweden is also a member of the United Nations (UN).
Sweden is also a monarchy, but the King has no real power today.
Sweden is also divided into county council regions, landsting, large areas which are primarily responsible for healthcare, and municipalities, kommuner, which are smaller areas responsible for schools, day nurseries and other local issues, lokala frågor*.
Sweden is sparsely populated, with vast tracts of countryside to enjoy.
Sweden was also the first country in Europe to grant municipal voting rights to immigrants without Swedish citizenship.
Sweden was an important European power in those days, and much larger than it is today.
Sweden was now a Christian country under the religious leadership of the Pope in Rome.
Sweden’s other energy sources include nuclear power, kärnkraft*, as well as oil and coal, which are imported from other countries.
Swedes often eat pasta dishes at home, and might have a Greek salad with tzatziki at a party.
”Swedish African,” he muttered to himself under the bluebells and cowslips.
Swedish Church weddings are held at the Church of Sweden’s congregations abroad.
Swedish cities often have special bicycle tracks where cyclists need not deal with motor traffic.
Swedish citizens are therefore entitled to vote in European parliamentary elections, which are held every fifth year.
Swedish civil weddings can also be held at certain Swedish embassies abroad.
Swedish film is much more than just Bergman, however.
Swedish groups are currently very popular in Japan.
Swedish has incorporated so many English words and expressions that people sometimes speak of svengelska, or Swenglish.
17 Swedish history A brief overview from the Ice Age to the Cyber Age
Swedish instruction is intended to be flexible and easily adaptable to the needs of different people or groups.
“Swedish” is a diffuse concept.
Swedish is my native language, yet people couldn’t understand what I said.
Swedish law distinguishes between these types of relationships.
Swedish law takes a tough stance against cheating on taxes and subsidies.
Swedish morality is simple and direct on this point: a good person cleans the lint filter on the drier.
Swedish traditions have changed over the years.
Swedish views of the body and of sex have also changed.
Sweet loaves are among the commonest offerings in Swedish shops.
Särvux provides education for developmentally disabled adults.
Taxes should be cut so that people can live on their after-tax wages without being dependent on subsidies.
Team sports are popular in Sweden, especially soccer and ice hockey.
Temp agencies also employ people, renting out their services to other companies that need staff for a limited time.
Temp agencies arrange jobs of various types, including both office and industrial work.
Temp agencies have proved themselves a way into the Swedish labour market for many immigrants.
temporary appointments, visstidsanställning, which are effective for a specified period of time.
Temporary services agencies, bemanningsföretag, also known as staffing or recruiting companies, uthyrningsföretag, now employ more and more people.
Temporary, tidsbegränsade*, positions are growing more and more common.
Ten people turned on the pavements to stare.
That doesn’t mean it will be a walk in the park (as you have probably already realised).
That includes you too.
That is not discrimination – it’s the same for native Swedes You have to put up with a lot, living here.
That is when they can get out into the country or see friends and relatives.
That makes it easier to give your child the best help possible.
That means that they are not permitted to take a stand for or against a controversial issue, and that they must give air time to many different opinions.
That means that you, the parent, can have a say in how the school is run.
That was where she belonged.
That which distinguishes us from one another has become as important and valuable as that which unites us.
That would have been enough.
That you were still capable of shame.
That’s a sign that should be put up in every Swedish laundry room.
That’s what was needed in the past, when most people were manual labourers.
That’s what’s so dangerous about shells.
That’s when we welcome the spring.
The Act also gives the municipality responsibility for the planning of streets, housing, water and electricity.
The Act also specifies the basic rules all schools must follow.
The address is listed at the end of this chapter.
The administrative courts often handle cases involving taxes, allowances, driving licences, placement of children in a foster home and placement of substance abusers in treatment centres.
The adult education associations provide courses of varying scope with far-ranging content.
The advantage of permanent tenure is that you can count on having work for a long time to come.
The alarm is a little device that you wear like a wristwatch.
The amount covered by legal aid and the amount you must pay yourself depends on your financial situation.
The amount deducted is called preliminary tax, preliminärskatt, since it is an advance, approximate payment that may not exactly correspond to the final tax.
The amount of your sickness benefits depends on your salary.
The amount payable in parents’ allowance is partially determined by how much the parent earned before having the child.
The amount you pay depends on your income or pension.
The authorities calculate your final tax with the help of your tax return, självdeklaration.
The bank or real-estate agent can help you with the figures.
The basic allowance is paid by a special unemployment benefit fund called the Alfa-kassan.
The basic rule is to be careful and show consideration for other road users with a view to avoiding accidents.
The basic Swedish for immigrants instruction is abbreviated SFI.
The best advice is to see what your neighbours do and ask someone if you are unsure.
The best known are those in Delsbo, Hälsingland, and Bingsjö, Dalarna.
The best known is Göteborgs filmfestival.
The best-known Swedish children’s author is Astrid Lindgren, whose vast production includes books on Pippi Longstocking and the mischievous Emil.
The big man with the big hairdo stood planted under the floral-pattern umbrella in surprise, watching the confused figure disappear into the distance.
The birth of Jesus is traditionally celebrated early on Christmas morning, when the churches hold a special early service called julotta.
The book-mobile does not carry a huge range of books, but you can order the ones you want to borrow and the bookmobile will bring them to you.
The boundary between the familiar and the foreign no longer runs through the nearest passport control – it runs right through our midst.
The brochure is available in several languages.
The capital of Sweden is Stockholm, which is also the country’s largest city.
The care provider can get relief, avlösning*, by allowing someone else to care for the sick family member during certain hours.
The celebrations for students who have completed nine-year compulsory school or graduated from upper-secondary school are especially important.
The Centrala Studiestödsnämnden (CSN, or National Board of Student Aid), administers home furnishing loans.
The ceremony is similar to that of an ordinary civil wedding, and information is available from the municipality or the district court.
The ceremony of confirmation, an active profession of Christian faith, is held after the period is over.
The check-ups and vaccinations provided by children’s healthcare centres are always free.
The child may not be more than two months old and must be given an anaesthetic, smärtlindring, by a doctor or nurse.
The children are dressed as Easter witches, with long skirts and kerchiefs round their heads.
The children may be involved with music or sports, and the parents may go to courses or association meetings.
The Christmas ham is a smoked or lightly salted loin of pork that is boiled or roasted, then coated with eggs and mustard and browned.
The Church of Sweden became an evangelical Lutheran church which, together with the state, exercised a great deal of influence on the conditions under which people lived.
The Church of Sweden has over 7 million members.
The Church took a part in the conscription of soldiers for Sweden’s wars, especially during the seventeenth century.
The closing sections deal with substance abuse, domestic problems and economic problems.
The company may also give notice to an employee if there is not enough work or insufficient money, or if the employee has not been doing the job properly.
The constitution also asserts the principle of public access to official records.
The council is the equivalent of parliament at the municipal level, while the municipal executive board is the equivalent of the government.
The country also became more and more united.
The country has vast forestlands and many waterways.
The country was divided into provinces, each with its own laws.
The country’s borders extended to include not only Finland, which had been part of Sweden for several centuries, but many other areas annexed in wars.
The country’s economy thus suffered no lasting damage as a result of war, and its earlier poverty gradually disappeared.
The country’s traditions are one of them.
The county administrative boards, länsstyrelserna, by contrast, are government authorities that are responsible for a smaller area, a county, län.
The county councils are in charge of most hospitals and healthcare centres.
The county councils send out notices to women to come in for screening.
The court charges an application fee of several hundred kronor to consider a dispute.
The court is also empowered to order the defendant to pay damages, skadestånd, a monetary compensation payable to the person injured by the crime.
The court’s work on civil cases is otherwise provided free of charge.
The courts are independent of both the government and public authorities.
The crayfish are cooked in a dill-flavoured broth, and brännvin is often served.
The curriculum also sets forth the outlook on people and other values that should inform the work of the schools.
The Danish armies were eventually defeated, and Gustav Vasa became king.
The day after, on Good Friday, långfredagen, Jesus’ death on the cross is commemorated.
The dead are often cremated in Sweden, after which an urn containing the ashes is interred at a cemetery.
The decision will normally come through within a few weeks.
The defendant is entitled to enlist the aid of a defence counsel, försvarare, a specialist with legal training.
The definitions of these crimes vary from country to country, however, and so, too, does the seriousness with which various acts are regarded.
The delicate greenery of early summer is usually on its way by this time of year.
The departing tenant may want payment for things he or she leaves behind, however.
The difference is that counties are governed by county administrative boards, which are state-level authorities, while county councils are governed by politicians elected in general elections.
The difference is that university colleges provide only a basic degree, while you can do research, forskning, and pursue a post-graduate degree at the universities.
The differences between rich and poor were great.
The director of a county administrative board is the county governor.
The disease is called HIV in its early stages, following infection with the human immunodeficiency virus.
The distance between the parental home and the school determines the amount of the board supplement.
The district court usually starts by encouraging the parties to agree to settle the dispute.
The DO has information in many languages on its website.
The Eastern Orthodox churches work together through the ecumenical council of the Orthodox and Eastern churches (OÖKER).
The education provided at folk high schools is freer than that provided at ordinary schools, giving groups and individuals more scope for deciding how to structure their studies.
The educational advisers at the schools and universities can provide you with information on how easy or difficult it is to gain admission to such programmes.
The EFS’s emphasis is on the Christian mission – reviving faith in God – and on everyday Christian living.
The employer deducts a certain percentage of your gross salary to pay tax.
The Employment Office can provide more information on unemployment benefits and unemployment benefit funds.
The Employment Office has offices in all municipalities.
The enforcement service also collects debts for the state and for municipalities – unpaid taxes, unpaid student loans, parking fines, etc.
The enforcement service can also help a landlord evict tenants who have not paid their rent or have otherwise failed to abide by the rental contract.
The environmental movement is a more recent example.
The Equal Opportunities Ombudsman, JämO, is charged with seeing that the Equal Rights Act is adhered to.
The estate inventory must be submitted to the tax authority.
The Estonian, Serbian, Macedonian, and Greek Orthodox churches came to Sweden later, and the Rumanian and Bulgarian Orthodox churches later still.
The expense involved is generally that of retaining a lawyer, a legal specialist.
The expression “Nordic countries” refers to Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland and Iceland.
The father or a friend or relative is usually present during delivery.
The Federation of Private Enterprises, for example, helps its members – small businesspeople – to stay abreast of new tax regulations and get other information of interest to them.
The fee goes towards the loan on the building, and towards repairs and insurance.
The fee must be the same even if the costs of operating a day nursery may vary in different parts of the municipality.
The filter collects lint from the clothing in the drier.
The final grades are called a leaving certificate.
The first candle is lit on the first Sunday of Advent, the second on the second Sunday, and so on.
The first independent Christian congregations were referred to as free churches.
The first Swedish Buddhist groups were established in 1950.
The first time you pay a patient fee, make sure you get a “high-cost card”, högkostnadskort, on which all your payments are entered.
The first written laws date from the thirteenth century.
The foundation of all Swedish legislation relating to children is respect for children.
The foundations of the Swedish parliament – the Riksdag – were laid in the Middle Ages.
The four estates were the nobility (great families who were granted special privileges by the king), the priesthood, the burghers (city residents) and the farmers.
The four families are Lutheran, Catholic, free churches and Eastern Orthodox.
The full-blown disease, which can take years to incubate, is called AIDS.
The funeral fee is used to pay for a grave site, cremation, interment and premises for a non-sectarian funeral.
The Föräldraföreningen mot narkotika has brochures about drugs and the various signs that a young person may be developing a drug problem.
The gap between rich and poor, which had long been unusually narrow in Sweden by comparison with other countries, has therefore begun to grow again.
The geographical region in which Sweden and its neighbours Norway and Denmark are situated is known as Scandinavia.
The Golden Rule appears in many sacred writings, though the wording may vary.
The Golden Years Support and service for the elderly As people grow older, they begin to need special services and help.
The good receive angel’s wings and blessings, while the rest get horns and endless heat.
The government (or cabinet) consists of cabinet ministers, statsråd, who head or are associated with the various ministries, departement.
The grant is given freely, but the loan must be repaid.
The Greens are more difficult to categorise, for the party takes positions on every individual issue based on its consequences for the environment.
The guarantee pension, garantipensionen, supports those who have received a low income or none at all.
The healthcare system is obliged to provide interpreters for all those who need them.
The heavens opened.
The home is also adorned with other Christmas decorations.
The hours you are present are recorded on your time card, stämpelkort*, or the like so that your employer can see you have worked the correct number of hours.
The important thing is to work together to make sure that the children enjoy the best possible conditions.
The income-based pension, inkomstpensionen, is the most important component of your pension.
The initial sections are about purchases, loans and insurance.
The Insurance Office can answer all questions on sickness benefits, temporary disability allowance and parents’ allowance.
The interior of northern Sweden is covered by vast forests and mountains – “fjällen”, or “the fells” – along the Norwegian boundary.
The Internationella Företagarföreningen i Sverige provides information in several languages on its site at www.ifs.a.se.
The introduction should be based on the individual’s own needs and background, including his or her education and profession.
The introductory period is ordinarily two years, but can be extended if there are special grounds for doing so.
The introductory period usually takes a couple of weeks for the youngest children and somewhat less for older children.
The Iranian new year often features in the press, which covers the celebrations.
The judges and jurors discuss the case, then issue their judgement, dom.
The King is Carl XVI Gustaf, and the Queen’s name is Silvia.
The landlord should write an inspection report, besiktningsprotokoll, when the previous tenant moves out.
The language’s tricky å, ä, ö and sj sounds will keep both your mind and your mouth busy.
The largest are the Workers’ Educational Association (ABF), Folkuniversitetet, the Swedish Federation for Study Promotion (Studiefrämjandet), the Adult Educational Association (Studieförbundet Vuxenskolan), the Educational Association of the Citizens’ School (Medborgarskolan), the Salaried Employees’ Educational Association (TBV), the Swedish Sports Movement’s Educational Association (SISU), the Adult Education of the Temperance Movement (NBV), the Swedish Ecclesiastical Educational Association (SKS) and the Educational Association of the Free Churches (FS).
The largest eastern church in Sweden is the Syrian Orthodox Church, whose members come from Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and Syria.
The largest is the Roman Catholic Church, with 165,000 members.
The largest lakes are Vänern, Vättern and Mälaren.
The largest parties in each block, the Social Democrats and the Moderates, have agreed that state expenditure should be cut.
The last day of April, or Walpurgis night, Valborgsmässoafton, is an important one in Sweden.
The last four digits distinguish you from others born on the same date.
The last three freedoms on the list guarantee you the right to organise and participate in meetings, demonstrations and associations, and to practise your religion freely.
The last Thursday before Easter is called Maundy Thursday, skärtorsdag, and in the Churches the theme is the last supper Jesus ate with his disciples.
The late models.
The latter two documents are issued by the Migration Board.
The law also requires employers to promote ethnic diversity in any way they can.
The law also requires the court to take the children’s own wishes into consideration, depending on their age and level of maturity.
The law also stipulates that all part-time employees are entitled to 25 days’ paid holiday annually, the equivalent of a five-week leave.
The law specifies how much a housing agency may charge.
The law states that equal work receives equal pay.
The lay workers are responsible for many of the church’s social functions.
The leaving certificate is the basis for acceptance to programmes and courses at universities and other institutions of higher learning.
The library is something of a magnet for cultural life in most cities and towns.
The library staff are usually good at finding appropriate choices even if you are not looking for a particular book.
The Lithuanian philosopher Levinas writes of the faces of others in his books.
The local associations are active in municipal politics.
The Local Government Act governs both what municipalities may do and what they are obliged to do.
The local social welfare office can tell you whether there is one in your municipality.
The main employers’ organisation is now called the Confederation of Swedish Enterprise, Svenskt Näringsliv, previously known as SAF.
The main labour organisations are the Swedish Trade Union Confederation, LO for blue-collar workers, the Confederation of Professional Employees, TCO, for white-collar workers and the Swedish Confederation of Professional Associations, SACO, for professionals.
The major labour organisations include the National Union of General and the Municipal Workers, Kommunalarbetarförbundet, for workers in the care sector; the Swedish Metal Workers’ Union, Metall, for many industrial workers; and Swedish Commercial Employees’ Union, Handelsanställdas förbund, for commercial and service employees.
The majority of families see each other most on Saturdays and Sundays.
The man’s face lit up.
The maternity ward, or BB, is where mothers and newborns stay before going home.
The men wear their hair long, tucked up under large turbans.
The midwife carries out various tests to confirm that the foetus, fostret*, and the expectant mother are doing well.
The Migration Board does not generally accept a driving licence or certificate of birth, baptism or marriage.
The Migration Board is also entitled to grant special dispensation, ge dispens, – i.e. disregard the requirement of identity confirmation – if you have lived in Sweden for at least eight years.
The Migration Board or your municipal refugee co-ordinator can provide more information on citizenship rules.
The mildest punishment is a fine, böter – the payment of money.
The Ministry for Foreign Affairs deals with international issues, the Ministry of Finance handles economic issues, while the Ministry of Education is in charge of schools and related issues.
The Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Utrikesdepartementet (UD), can provide information.
The monasteries were shut down and their riches confiscated by the state.
The money is paid by the National Board of Student Aid, CSN, Centrala studiestödsnämnden.
The money you actually receive is your net salary, nettolön.
The most common course structure is the study circle, in which you study a subject together with a group that meets once a week.
The most common family unit consists of a mother, father and children.
The most important duty of the county councils is health and medical care.
The most important political body in Sweden is Parliament, riksdagen.
The most popular one goes like this:
The most severe genital mutilation is punishable by imprisonment for between two and ten years.
The most severe penalty in Sweden is imprisonment, fängelse.
The municipal council meets approximately once a month.
The municipalities also cooperate with sports and cultural associations.
The municipality also provides family counselling, familjerådgivning.
The municipality is responsible for providing instruction in the Swedish language and putting you in touch with the labour market, while you yourself are responsible for using the introductory period in a way that will provide maximum benefit to you.
63 The municipality Taking charge and providing services in your area
The name is not formally used any longer, but students are still said to ta studenten when they complete upper-secondary school.
The National Agency for Education, Skolverket, is the government authority in charge of child care and schools.
The National Agency for Higher Education has published a brochure on Swedish higher education that is available in Albanian Arabic, Persian, Somalian and several other languages.
The National Agency for Higher Education provides information on the national university aptitude test.
The National Board of Health and Welfare maintains a registry of people who have issued a statement consenting to or opposing removal of their organs used for transplantation.
The National Board of Student Aid (CSN) makes decisions on study assistance.
The National Touring Theatre, Riksteatern, serves all of Sweden.
The neighbour got the time wrong, came an hour too early.
The neighbour just stares at me and my lint.
The net result is that you should think long and hard about where you want to live.
7 The new country Introduction
The new pension system applies to people born in 1938 or later.
The new, very small cars are subject to the same regulations as EU mopeds.
The next step is to register with the Social Insurance Office, Försäkringskassan.
The non-socialist parties, on the other hand, advocate individual solutions and support the freedom of individuals to make a life for themselves.
The number consists of ten digits: your year, month and date of birth, and four additional digits.
The number of applicants for different programmes varies.
The number to dial is 020-52 10 10.
The objective of the introduction is to give new arrivals the ability to support themselves and feel themselves a part of Swedish society.
The offender is fitted with an electronic ankle bracelet, elektronisk fotboja – a monitoring device – and is not permitted to leave home without the approval of the correctional service.
The official is obliged to inform you of where you can lodge an appeal.
The old tradition of Lenten fasting is no longer observed.
The only difference is that sins are caught by the filter of conscience.
The only limitation is that you are not permitted to insult named individuals or engage in agitation against a group of the population, hets mot folkgrupp, meaning attacking another group on grounds of race, skin colour, religious belief, national or ethnic origin, etniskt ursprung*, or sexual orientation.
The only requirement for driving a class 2 moped, which has a top speed of 25–30 km per hour, is that you are at least 15 years old.
The orthodox and eastern Christian churches have some 100,000 members in Sweden, most of them immigrants from Turkey and the countries of the Middle East and Africa.
The other is mammography, mammografi, intended to discover breast cancer.
The parent not living with the children is obliged to pay maintenance contributions, underhållsbidrag, for the children until they are 18 years old.
The parents and childminders take part in activities along with the staff.
The parents may move apart during the reconciliation period if they so wish.
The parents of the children in each class usually meet with the class teacher or mentors a couple of times per year.
The party or coalition of parties that receives the most votes in a parliamentary election is entitled to form a government, regering, and rule the country for the next four years.
The Pentecostal Movement is Sweden’s largest free church, with 90,000 members.
The people choose their political representatives in general elections, and the party or parties that receive the most votes are allowed to govern.
The people were small groups of hunter-gatherers, who lived by hunting, fishing and collecting edible plants, moving from place to place as they did so.
The percentage of female MPs has increased, as have the numbers of women in other important positions in the country, though the percentages are still lower than the percentage of women in the population.
The percentage of upper-secondary school graduates with foreign backgrounds who go on to higher education is lower than the percentage of Swedish-born youth that continues at this level.
The period from August to December is the autumn term, höstterminen, and the period from January to June the spring term, vårterminen.
The person convicted is permitted to go free but is given a two-year trial period.
The pocket guide is available in several other language versions, including Swedish and easy Swedish.
The pocket guide provides ready answers on everything from schools to work and taxes to the history of the country.
The police control the traffic and keep the peace and take action if, for example, someone is found driving so fast or is so drunk that he or she may cause damage.
The police may arrest gripa, people suspected of having committed a crime but may not detain them for more than a few hours.
The police or the county administrative board can provide more information on the applicable rules.
The politicians who sit in Parliament make decisions at the highest level, applicable to the entire country.
The popular movements offer activities in which many people take part.
The population of the entire country was only some 800,000 people.
The powerful men of Sweden did not want Danish masters; they wanted Sweden to be self-governed.
The primary care system encompasses maternity care, child healthcare and home healthcare, which are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter.
The primary care system is also charged with providing preventive care, intended to prevent illness, and oversees the outpatient care provided by healthcare centres.
The primary mission of the schools is to give students knowledge and an ability to use it.
The private theatres specialise primarily in comedy and light musicals, while the independent troupes present a varied repertoire.
The problem was cars.
The procession sings Lucia and Christmas carols, and sometimes serves coffee and lussekatter, saffron and raisin buns baked especially for the occasion.
The prosecutor, åklagaren, represents the state and advocates punishment for the alleged crime.
The protracted struggles between powerful families and different regions came to an end, and Sweden eventually became united under a single king who enjoyed the support of the church.
The public sector is larger in Sweden than in many other countries.
The public sector is responsible for child care and must provide children with security and education.
The recommendation is detailed in an official report, which is generally sent to public authorities and organisations that might have opinions to express on the matter.
The Red Cross and other organisations also operate special centres.
The regional and cultural differences that existed in pre-modern Sweden were great, as were the differences between social classes, and the differences between locals and outsiders.
The registration rules apply not only to cars but also to other vehicles, such as motorcycles and EU mopeds.
The relative in Sweden will also be interviewed before the Migration Board makes its decision on a residence permit.
The relative will be summoned to the embassy or consulate for an interview, intervju*, after which the application will generally be forwarded to the Migration Board in Sweden.
The RFSL is an organisation for homosexual and bisexual people and has 32 local offices nation-wide.
The right of common access, allemansrätten, is a venerable tradition, enabling you to move freely through the countryside, regardless of who owns the land.
The right of common access, allemansrätten, is an important precept in Sweden.
The Roman Catholic Church has a bishop in Sweden.
The royal family has no real political power, however; its significance is historical and symbolic.
The rules differ depending on whether you are a refugee, an immigrant or the child of immigrants.
The rules governing how far you must live from school to be entitled to transportation vary from municipality to municipality.
The rules governing pensions are not discussed here; see the chapter on Money.
The rules were changed because it is considered valuable for children to be together and to benefit from the teaching methods of the child care system.
The same number is used throughout the country.
The same province, Dalarna, has for many years been home to Musik vid Siljan, an annual week of music.
The school year begins in August and ends in early June.
The schools should engage students in discussions of why conflicts arise and how they can be resolved.
The schools should help students take responsibility and develop a feeling of solidarity with others.
The schools should work together with the home, helping students grow up to be responsible adults.
The second largest city is Göteborg, followed by Malmö, Uppsala and Linköping.
The shop either has to repair the shoes, return your money or give you a new pair of shoes.
The sick person might be able to spend time at a day-centre, a few days a week, or stay at a temporary residential centre, korttidsboende*, during certain weeks.
The size of your premium pension depends on how well your unit trusts manage the money you place with them.
The Social Democratic party has dominated Swedish politics since the thirties.
The Social Democrats, or Social Democratic Labour Party, are the oldest, having been founded in 1889.
The Social Insurance Office can answer questions about which rules apply to you.
The social services first check to see whether the child can stay with a relative.
The social services include pre-schools, recreation centres, service flats, the home help service and more, which are discussed elsewhere in this book.
The 1st of May, första maj, is the day of the labour movement, and is always a holiday.
The state partially subsidises basic dental care, such as check-ups and fillings, so the patient does not pay the full cost of treatment.
The state supplies grant money to municipalities to provide introductions to refugees and their immediate family.
The sticker is visible proof that you have paid the tax.
The Stockholm archipelago consists of some 25,000 islands, for example.
The Stockholm centre can be reached at 08-30 30 20 and has a website at http://Stockholm.mansjouren.org.
The studentexamen was the old school leaving exam.
The students dress up and the classroom is decorated with flowers.
The supreme leader of the Catholic church is the Pope, whose seat is in the Vatican City in Rome.
The suspect is termed the defendant, åtalade.
The Swedish authorities try to accommodate the wishes of other communities within the limits of the law and possibility.
The Swedish ecclesiastical year begins with the first Sunday of Advent, which falls at the end of November or the beginning of December.
The Swedish Film Institute, Svenska Filminstitutet, is Sweden’s central film agency.
The Swedish flag is flown at public buildings, on buses and on private houses.
The Swedish Missionary Society views churches and local congregations as provisional structures, useful until unity can be achieved.
The Swedish Missionary Society, with 67,000 members, strives for interaction and cooperation between churches.
The tax cuts have primarily benefited those with high or medium incomes.
The tax office can ensure that a special remark is entered along with your name and personal identification number at all public authorities.
The tax rate varies from municipality to municipality.
The teacher has a special responsibility for monitoring your child’s schooling and development.
The telephone number is in the directory.
The Thirty Years’ War pitted Catholic armies against Protestant armies; it was a war of both power and religion.
The time between giving notice and quitting is the period of notice, uppsägningstid.
The time you spend doing things other than working or going to school is your leisure time, fritid.
The traditional Midsummer meal, midsommarmaten, is herring and potatoes – preferably fresh, new ones – and many adult Swedes wash it down with brännvin, a type of spirits.
The traditional Swedish Christmas buffet is served at many restaurants during December.
The traditional Swedish Christmas foods, julmaten, include ham, pork ribs, pork brawn, pickled herring, lutfisk – boiled salt ling – with sauce, and rice pudding.
The tree is dressed with shiny balls, flags, elves and the like, and candles are clipped onto the branches.
The union can provide you with counselling on issues relating to wages, risks in the working environment and other workplace problems.
The upper-secondary schools offer a variety of programmes, program.
The wages of many employees are set by collective agreements, kollektivavtal*, established between the employers and the labour organisation in charge of that area of labour.
The warranty is a guarantee from the shop that it will repair the watch or VCR at its own cost if it stops working before the guarantee period is over.
The website of the Integration Board also provides information on what various municipalities can offer.
The website of the National Board of Student Aid can be found at www.csn.se.
The weeks leading up to Easter are called Lent, fastan.
The whistling of their engines sounded like shells flying in, when they are going to hit nearby.
The youngest children are cared for at pre-schools, sometimes called dagis or day nurseries, and family day nurseries.
Their address and telephone number can be found at the end of this chapter.
Their faces.
Their families and relatives gather in the schoolyard to greet the graduates as they leave school, class by class, singing a special graduation song.
Their family name is Bernadotte.
Their opinions are often solicited on commission reports, as discussed previously.
Their ultimate goal is ecumenical unity – the unification of all churches.
Their voyages combined war-making with commerce.
Their watercourses may not be destroyed to build power plants, kraftverk*.
There are a lot of things to bear in mind if you want to get the most for your money.
There are a variety of techniques of alleviating the pain of giving birth.
There are also general study programmes which correspond to upper-secondary school studies and lead to eligibility for continued studies at an institution of higher learning.
There are also independent schools.
There are also many immigrant associations where people get together to preserve the culture of their home country and pass it on to their children.
There are also many private educational programmes for which you must pay, where you can study anything from massage therapy to acting.
There are also many smaller free churches active in locations throughout Sweden.
There are also men’s crisis centres for men who need someone to talk to.
There are also parental cooperative, föräldrakooperativa*, pre-schools, which are owned and operated by parents with grant money from the municipality, and staff co-operative, personalkooperativa, pre-schools, which are owned and operated by the staff, also with grant money from the municipality.
There are also private housing agencies.
There are also special children’s insurance policies, barnförsäkringar, that provide extra benefits for children who have long-term illnesses or accidents.
There are also sports schools, idrottsgymnasier, with nation-wide recruiting areas, where upper-secondary studies are combined with training in sports such as orienteering, soccer or skiing.
There are both general study degrees without any particular professional focus and other degrees that lead to occupational qualifications.
There are 21 counties in Sweden.
There are driving schools, trafikskolor, that provide instruction for those wishing to obtain a driving licence.
There are fully 100,000 lakes.
There are individual programmes with introductory courses for immigrants.
There are just under 1,000 Bahá’ís in Sweden, who are distributed all round the country.
There are many periodicals in Sweden, both in printed form and, more recently, on the Internet.
There are many young music groups in Sweden.
There are more university colleges than universities in Sweden.
There are national standards for VG and MVG.
There are only a couple of Hindu temples in Sweden, but Hindus often meet at the premises of the Hare Krishna movement in several cities and towns around the country.
There are only about 800 Sikhs in Sweden.
There are patients’ associations for a wide range of illnesses.
There are people who officiate at civil ceremonies in every municipality; you can contact them through the municipality or district court.
There are 700,000 people who were born in Sweden but have one or more parents who were born abroad.
There are pizza and kebab bars in almost all larger towns.
There are Rent and Leasehold Tribunals in twelve Swedish cities.
There are several Buddhist associations and a Buddhist coordinating council.
There are several national Muslim organisations in Sweden.
There are so many bureaucrats, for example...one time I seriously considered sending a bill to the Insurance Office for the coffee thermos I flung at the wall in a rage after a phone conversation with them.
There are sometimes long waiting lists for certain operations.
There are special clinics for young people with eating disorders, ätstörningar, such as anorexia (self-starvation) and bulimia (binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting).
There are special schools for children with certain functional disabilities.
There are speed limits, hastighetsbegränsningar, on all Swedish roads.
There are ten ministries, each in charge of a particular area.
There are those who assert that people are just as instinctively drawn to and stimulated by encounters with other cultures and lifestyles, and that what democracy is facing today is a historic opportunity, not an insoluble problem.
There are three types of national pension: income-based pension, premium pension and guarantee pension.
There are two types of trials: civil cases, tvistemål, which are discussed later in this chapter, and criminal cases, brottmål.
There are two types of unemployment benefits, a basic allowance, grundbelopp, and income-based compensation, inkomstrelaterad ersättning.
There are usually plenty of books for children to read on their own or that can be read aloud by an adult.
There are usually various alternatives, but the services of an undertaker typically cost about 15,000 kronor.
There are youth recreation centres, swimming pools, sports facilities, museums and theatres in some municipalities but not others.
There is a Sikh congregation in Stockholm.
There is a syllabus, kursplan, for every individual subject.
There is also a great deal of useful information on the Internet.
There is much to take into consideration if you want to start a company.
There is no charge for borrowing books from the public library.
There is respect even for the weakest of all – the children.
There is usually one group in charge of school and pre-schools, another that plans new buildings and streets, a third that deals with issues relating to the elderly and the functionally disabled, funktionshindrade*, and so on.
There may, for example, be different compensation rules for things you have in your flat and things you keep in your car, in the attic or in the cellar.
There used to be many jobs which you could easily manage without having attended school for very long.
There was little peace in this union, however.
There was no time for it.
There was still great poverty, however, and in the early twentieth century labourers formed unions to fight for better conditions.
There were hardly any roads during this period, only narrow tracks and paths.
There were often struggles for royal power, and those who would be king convened meetings of the people from whom they desired support.
There you can take both short courses and longer courses lasting a term or more.
These are a form of sickness benefits lasting up to 50 days; you apply to the Social Insurance Office.
These are followed by sections on dental care, psychiatric care and disabilities.
These are intended as a complement to the schools and provide children with meaningful leisure time and support in their development.
These are often called jourcentraler, “emergency centres”, and their telephone numbers can be found in the Blue Pages of the telephone directory.
These are placed in water indoors and provide an early taste of spring when their tiny leaves unfold.
These are semlor.
These are served by political bodies of their own, the county councils, landstingsfullmäktige, and municipal councils, kommunfullmäktige.
These are special programmes that are available in just one place; anyone from the entire country may apply.
These areas are now parts of Russia, Estonia, Latvia, Poland, Germany and Norway.
These elections are held every four years, at the same time as the parliamentary and county council elections.
These fees are often subsidised, subventionerade, meaning they are somewhat lower than the actual cost of providing the service, so that those with little money can make use of municipal services.
These groups are known as boards, nämnder, or executive committees, styrelser; examples are the local housing committee and local board of education.
These have less staff than ordinary recreation centres, and children do not have to be registered to participate.
These include freedom of the press and freedom of speech, which guarantee all people the right to express their opinions.
These include many immigrants from the rest of Europe and Latin America, and mass is held in both Polish and Spanish.
These meetings gradually developed into a parliament, or diet, with four estates which represented the interests of different sectors of society.
These must include the eight core subjects but may otherwise be locally designed.
These parties usually organise demonstrations, too.
These provide information on topics such as nursing, caring for a newborn and pain relief, smärtlindring, during delivery, förlossningen.
These three months are counted as of the beginning the upcoming month.
These two organisations exist to help people with new businesses.
They also make decisions on other issues of some types, such as the right to adopt or to change your name.
They also receive instruction on venereal diseases such as chlamydia and HIV and how to protect themselves against such diseases.
They are also responsible for dental care for children and young people, for certain educational programmes and for some public transport, kollektivtrafik*.
They are charged with providing schools, pre-schools and libraries in the municipality, ensuring that refugees are introduced successfully, providing service flats, servicehus*, and home help services, hemtjänst*, for the elderly and others in need, and providing firefighting and sanitation, renhållning*, services.
They are governed by municipal and county council politicians, who are chosen in elections that are separate from parliamentary elections.
They are known as child-minders or “day mothers”.
They are the Royal Swedish Opera, Kungliga Operan, and the Royal Dramatic Theatre, Kungliga Dramatiska Teatern, often simply called Dramaten.
They can also go to the school nurse if they fall ill at school.
They can also receive study guidance in their own language if necessary.
They can also voice opinions on national policy to the party’s national association.
They can arrange contact through an assistant caseworker, support conversations, or care in a family or treatment centre, behandlingshem.
They can tell you what needs to be done in conjunction with a funeral.
They charge a fee of several hundred kronor for this service.
They continue to constitute a portion of the country’s exports, but industrial products such as cars, machinery, cellular telephones and pharmaceuticals are now more important.
They cost more, and the costs are not entered on your high-cost card.
They deal with issues relating to industry, the labour market, and roads and transportation within the county.
They draw up a statement of opinion, remissvar, a letter in which they express their opinions and perhaps propose amendments.
They employ children’s librarians who are specialists in children’s literature.
They give vaccinations, vaccinationer*, tend wounds, etc., at their offices at the healthcare centres.
They have a number of plays in production and tour nation-wide.
They have three children: Victoria, Carl Philip and Madeleine.
They keep regular hours and provide check-ups and certain vaccinations.
They made new tools, which enabled them to build better dwellings and cultivate more land.
They may also have labels with care instructions, showing, for example, the temperature you should use to wash an article of clothing, or how to remove a stain from a sofa.
They may also receive guidance, studiehandledning*, in their native language.
They may also want to know the size of your or your family’s income.
They may have homes for the aged with multilingual personnel, for example.
They may, however, be eligible for income support, försörjningsstöd, which is provided to people with no source of income.
They may want to see a reference from a previous landlord or someone else who can vouch for your being a good tenant.
They number some 6,000 and have no permanent organisation.
They play and eat cake and decorate the home with balloons and streamers.
They serve many functions that are handled by state-level authorities or private companies in other countries.
They share their relationship, their children and their home.
They should teach students to reject persecution and harassment of individuals and groups.
They specialise in ingredients common in those areas, such as various types of rice, beans, flour and spices.
They spoke of creating a society that would be a Home for the People, folkhem, without great social and economic differences.
They spoke the same language, shared the same history, religion and traditions, and had more or less the same ideas about what constitutes a good society.
They then strip away the candles and decoration and throw out the tree, which by now has lost quite a lot of its needles.
They usually have lists of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the associations registered with the municipality.
This allows even those who do not live in large cities to go to the theatre.
This also applies if you wish to serve alcoholic beverages at a restaurant or a party open to the general public.
This also applies to children with a Swedish father if the child is born outside Sweden.
This also applies to children’s dental care.
This applies to all people, regardless of religious affiliation.
This chapter concerns the religions represented in Sweden.
This chapter is about the Swedish school system, the values that underpin it and how the system is structured.
This committee is in charge of libraries, bibliotek, museums, museer, and sports facilities, idrottsanläggningar.
This creates channels for discussion with the school administration and school politicians.
This does not mean that a democracy based on ethnic and cultural diversity can be created in the blink of an eye.
This enables both parents to continue sharing responsibility for their children’s upbringing.
This enables the allowance days to be extended over a longer period.
This enables the sublessor to be sure he or she will be entitled to occupy the flat throughout the period agreed upon, and you can be sure of getting the flat back when the sublessor moves out.
This entails appointing one or more people to study an issue and make a recommendation on what should be done.
This entitlement remains effective for as long as you live here, and the permit itself never needs to be renewed.
This entitles you to take a taxi or specially adapted vehicle for a low fee.
This event is known as the Stockholm blood-bath, Stockholms blodbad, and the Danish King Christian II became known in Sweden as Christian the Tyrant.
This goal is important both for Sweden and for you as a new arrival.
This has made it more difficult to get a foothold in the Swedish labour market than it was previously.
This holiday may have been preceded by pagan festivals of the sun, and may also have been inspired by the Jewish Sukkoth festival.
This includes activities financed by taxes, such as schools, healthcare, care of the elderly, police, sanitation, renhållning*, and road-building.
This includes grave clothes, a coffin, flower arrangements, advertising, transport of the deceased and some type of gathering after the funeral.
This indicates the price per kilo, litre or unit of the food item, enabling you to compare it with other brands.
This involves a period of instruction, undervisning, on Christianity and faith.
This is a dialect that has developed in Rinkeby, near Stockholm, where people from many different countries live.
This is a form containing a variety of information on your finances.
This is called an occupational pension, or contract pension.
This is considered fraud.
This is extremely common in Sweden.
This is followed by sections on the Employment Office, employment, unemployment benefits and starting a company.
This is known as a home furnishing loan.
This is known as the right of access, umgängesrätt, and usually entails that the children meet the other parent on certain weekends, major holidays and during some of the school holidays.
This is legal as long as the amount is reasonable, but you are not obliged to buy the items if you do not want them.
This is not only because more people from diverse cultures have come here and become our neighbours; our entire culture has become more individualised.
This is not the case.
This is primarily a northern tradition.
This is something to be avoided, since landlords and banks keep track of who has received official non-payment notices.
This is the biggest holiday of the year for men’s choirs.
This is the date until which you can expect the food to remain fresh if stored properly.
This is the origin of the celebration of Holy Communion, in which the congregation shares bread and wine during the service.
This is the season when students begin their summer holiday, sommarlov.
This is your opportunity to discuss your child’s progress with the school staff.
This lists any damage that may have been done to the flat.
This may seem self-evident.
This pattern has changed a great deal in the past century, just as society itself has evolved.
This period is known as the Iron Age, järnåldern.
This period was therefore called the Bronze Age, bronsåldern.
This regulation is intended to help keep the air clean and protect public health.
This remark will prevent any authority from revealing your new address, no matter who requests it.
This service is free of charge and is available through the municipality or county council.
This service is provided subject to a means test, behovsprövad, meaning that the municipality evaluates your need for the service to see if you are entitled to help.
This specifies the knowledge and skills students should have when they finish compulsory school.
This system may be changed.
This trend is usually referred to as internationalisation, internationalisering, or globalisation, globalisering.
This varies from municipality to municipality.
This was completely ridiculous.
This was the beginning of the labour movement, arbetarrörelsen.
This will ensure you of more money after tax each month of the year instead of having to wait for the excess tax to be refunded later on.
This will indicate what the rent is and what it includes.
Those two weeks are called contract respite weeks, ångerveckor.
Those who believe they have been discriminated against on grounds of their sexual orientation may appeal to the Ombudsman against Discrimination because of Sexual Orientation, HomO.
Those who today advocate a society based on ethnic and cultural similarity advocate a society that does not exist, and that could only be brought about through assaults on basic democratic rights and freedoms.
Those who wish may start earlier.
Those with low income and no savings usually pay the lowest fees.
Through world trade, världshandeln, Sweden’s economy is now more greatly affected by events in other parts of the world than it was previously.
To be permitted to exchange something, you must have saved the receipt for the item you bought.
To be registered in the census rolls, bring your passport and residence permit to the Tax Authority or local tax office (see the Pink Pages of the telephone directory).
To become a naturalised Swedish citizen, you must meet the following requirements:
To call a country a democracy is to say that all its adult citizens have the right to vote on an equal footing.
To create an egalitarian, just society, schools, healthcare and care of children and the elderly should by financed by taxes.
To do so, you must first obtain the landlord’s permission.
To do so, you provide an account of your current finances so that the tax authorities can calculate your preliminary tax more accurately.
To ensure that even those who live far from the library can borrow books, some municipalities also operate book-mobiles that make regular, scheduled visits.
To get a census registration certificate, call at or ring the local tax office.
To mark the end of Christmas, a julgransplundring party is held.
To preserve his power, the Danish king had about a hundred of the most powerful men of Sweden killed in Stockholm.
To protect myself.
To qualify for compensation under a home insurance policy, you must be able to produce a document showing that you have reported the matter to the police.
To receive income-based compensation, you must have been a member of an unemployment benefit fund for at least 12 months.
To receive such criminal injuries compensation, brottsskadeersättning, you apply to the Criminal Victim Compensation and Support Authority – see Good to know.
To receive the full amount, you must have lived in Sweden for at least 40 years before retiring.
To receive unemployment benefits, you must have worked or studied full-time for a certain number of months during the past year.
To register a partnership, one of the parties must be a Swedish citizen resident in this country.
To report a crime, polisanmälan, such as a theft, you must notify the police.
To secure third party liability insurance, contact an insurance company.
To start a national programme, a student must receive passing marks in Swedish, English and mathematics.
To the best of my knowledge, there were no driers in the time of the prophets.
To this day, no-one knows whether the king was shot by the Norwegian troops the Swedes were fighting or was murdered by someone from his own side.
To this end, rules governing compensation for the sick and the unemployed were introduced.
Today, equality between the sexes, jämställdhet*, is considered such an important issue in Sweden that it is covered by special legislation.
Today, industry uses machines instead of people for such work.
Today, many churchgoers instead opt for the midnight mass, held between Christmas Eve and Christmas day.
Today, people dress lightly during the summer, and most are no longer bothered by semi-nude bodies, whether male or female.
Today, sex before marriage is not unusual.
Today, some 20,000 Jews live in Sweden.
Today, the message does not have the same impact on family life that it had 30–40 years ago.
Today they are often on a first-name basis with teachers.
Today, we better understand the distinctiveness and difference of every individual.
Today we realise that diversity and difference are here to stay.
Trade was controlled by the Hanse, a league of powerful cities in northern Germany.
Traditional Swedish dishes often contain pork, especially Christmas fare.
Traditions and popular customs in modern Sweden
Travel documents are supplied to convention refugees, and alien’s passports to others who have no national passport and are unable to obtain one.
Treatment is free of charge.
Two islands in the southern Baltic – Öland and Gotland – are very large.
Ultimately, the ancestors of all Swedes came from somewhere else, whether millennia or centuries ago, fifty, twenty or ten years ago – or even more recently.
Under a contract between these companies and the state, their programming is to be characterised by non-partisanship, objectivity, diversity and quality.
Under certain conditions, you may begin practising as early as 16 years of age.
Under Swedish law, it is illegal to discriminate against homosexuals, and two homosexuals can enter into a registered partnership and live together as if they were married.
Under the pension system introduced in 1999, the size of your pension is determined by how much you have worked and how much you have earned during your years in Sweden.
Under this convention, all decisionmakers dealing with cases involving children are expected to listen to the child and to put the best interests of the child first.
Unemployed persons receive sickness benefits as of the day after the qualifying day.
Union organisations are listed under the heading Fackliga organisationer in the Yellow Pages.
Unit price, jämförpris, is another word you will often see in groceries.
Unless you ask for something that’s against the rules.
Unlike many other countries, Sweden does permit cousins to marry.
Until then, all Swedes were members of the Church of Sweden, Svenska kyrkan, from birth.
Until then, serfs – slaves who worked in the fields or in the house – had been permitted, and they could be bought and sold like cattle or horses.
Until then, Sweden had been made up of relatively small areas ruled by minor kings.
Unwritten rules are more difficult to follow than written regulations, since you cannot actually read and refer to them.
Upon completing upper-secondary school, the student receives a leaving certificate showing all of his or her grades in all courses included in the study programme over the past three years.
Upper-secondary school students who study far from their parents’ home – in another municipality, for example – may be eligible for board supplement, inackorderingstillägg, from their home municipality.
Upper-secondary schools offer a range of courses, kurser, each of which provides a certain number of points, poäng.
Use of contraceptives is a matter of course.
Vacant co-operative flats can be located through newspaper advertisements or real-estate agents, mäklare, companies that help people buy and sell real property.
Vacant positions are also advertised in the newspapers.
Vaccinations and medical certificates are not covered by the healthcare system.
Various groups of Christians, prevented from expressing their belief as they saw fit, established congregations of their own.
Various types of language instruction are available to students with a native language other than Swedish.
Victims of burglary, assault or rape often feel depressed and worried long after the event.
Victoria stands next in line for the throne after the present King.
Volvos, Audis, Mercedes.
Voyages of the Vikings The Viking Era, is a famous period of Swedish history.
Wandering hunters become farmers When the ice melted, plants, animals and people migrated from the south to the ice-free areas.
War is about degradation.
Was that why he was sitting behind opaque black mirrored glass?
Was what I saw in the war the truth about people?
Water.
We all want to “do our own thing”, shape our lives as we see fit, find the communities that suit us, be just as different as we feel we truly are.
We are a moderate party founded on the premise that all people have equal rights and equal worth.
We can no more do so than we can opt out of an existence with increasingly open borders, ever faster communications and more and more regular contact between people around the globe.
We discuss different types of legal cases and how they are handled and outline the help available in legal issues.
We discuss only education that is funded by taxes and is free of charge.
We felt close to that street, to the simplicity of walking, to each other.
We have already mentioned Halloween, which has begun being celebrated in recent years.
We know who committed the murder and why, too.
We still do not know who committed the murder.
We strive to give all people greater influence over their everyday lives.
We want to combat unemployment by creating new, real jobs.
We welcome our relatives and friends across the threshold, but only rarely do we invite our neighbours in for coffee, a party or a bit of socialising.
We will also discuss the various political parties, some important laws protecting the rights of people to express their opinions, and the authorities to whom you can turn if you feel you have been treated improperly.
We will try to answer these questions in this chapter.
“Well?” he repeats in the voice of doom.
What are the county councils, and what do they do?
221 “What do you do in your leisure time?”
What does that prove?
What is a municipality and what does it do?
What will grow from this is a new Sweden, a new country.
What will they do?
What would have become of her, an orphan, abandoned, if she had stayed in Africa?
When a child starts at a pre-school or family day nursery, the parents come along until the child feels comfortable.
When children reach their teens, they are confirmed, konfirmerade.
When in 1520 the King of Denmark was also crowned King of Sweden, the Swedes protested vigorously.
When scheduling a visit to a doctor or municipal official, for example, you should always state whether you will need an interpreter.
When someone dies, the flag is flown at half-mast.
When Swedes live abroad, there are certain things they tend to miss.
When the politicians eventually make a decision on the issue, they are required to take these statements of opinion into consideration.
When visitors come from Sweden, Swedes living abroad often ask them to bring Swedish food, such as crispbread, fish roe spread or pickled herring.
When you are hired, you should receive an employment contract, anställningsavtal, or agreement stating, the rules applicable to wages, working hours, etc.
When you go in for a check-up, you will usually see a midwife, barnmorska, a specially trained nurse.
When you pay the tax, you receive a tax sticker that you affix to the number plate at the rear of the vehicle.
When you pay with a bank card, the money is withdrawn directly from the money you have in the bank.
When you pay with a credit card, you are borrowing money from the card issuer or bank.
When you press a button on the alarm, a signal goes out to the home help service, who will send someone to help you as quickly as possible.
When you sing a traditional song to your children, you are passing on your cultural heritage.
Whenever the need for help arises, you can apply for income support at the social services office of the municipality where you live.
Where possible, the social services always try to avoid breaking up families.
Whether you live in the city or the country, you live in a municipality.
Whether you want to sublet your flat to someone else or sublease someone else’s flat, it is important to draw up a contract specifying both the rental period and the period of notice.
Which unemployment benefit fund you join depends, then, on your profession.
Which will be like Kemo, like Alen, like Vernesa?
Which will be my executioner?
While participating in a programme, you generally receive an economic subsidy known as activity support, aktivitetsstöd.
Whitsuntide, pingsten, a couple of weeks later, is a big weekend for weddings.
Who governs a municipality, and how can you influence their decisions?
Who knows who might tip you off to a job?
Who will your customers and competitors be, and what must you do to be better than the competition?
Why did you let me lose everything?
Why didn’t you march down to the nearest street corner and shout out that this must not be permitted to happen?
Why would she want to go there?
With that said, however, you may otherwise hike freely through the forest and pick wild flowers – provided they are not protected – berries and mushrooms, no matter who owns the land.
With this privilege come responsibilities: you may not pull up plants, break branches or litter.
Within the parish, vicars, lay workers, musicians, children’s group leaders and others participate in services, choral singing, meetings for children, young people and pensioners, and a variety of other activities.
Women who are unsure can schedule a counselling session at a maternity care centre to discuss the decision.
Women who speak a language other than Swedish can call a special hotline for advice and support in a wide range of languages.
Women who think they may be pregnant, gravid, can buy a pregnancy test at the chemist’s.
Women with heavy work have the right to be transferred to easier tasks while they are pregnant.
Work and residence permits, UAT, are provided for researchers and others who come to Sweden to work for a limited period.
Working illegally while receiving benefits from the Social Insurance Office, Försäkringskassan, is a crime, as is failing to declare your earnings.
Yet another is the Rent and Leasehold Tribunal, Hyresnämnden, which handles disputes between tenants and landlords.
Yet another type of upper-secondary programme has nation-wide recruiting areas.
You also receive an official non-payment notice.
You and your municipality therefore share the responsibility for ensuring that the introduction is a success.
You are also entitled to a public trial before an impartial court.
You are entitled to an interpreter if you need one.
You are expected to give them sweets or biscuits, or perhaps give them a coin.
You are, however, required to have an identity card indicating your nationality.
You are under an obligation to tell your partner that you are infected.
You are usually allowed to keep them for two to three weeks, and a small fee is charged if you do not return them on time.
You can also appeal to the Parliamentary Ombudsman (JO).
You can also approach the union for help in getting the best possible terms of dismissal.
You can also check the newspaper for housing advertisements, or you can contact landlords directly.
You can also choose a civil wedding, borgerligt bröllop, entirely free of religious elements.
You can also choose only to join the unemployment benefit fund serving your professional area.
You can also contact Föräldraföreningen mot nar- kotika, an anti-drug organisation for parents.
You can also contact JämO directly.
You can also contact the healthcare centre if you have questions.
You can also contact the National Swedish Association for Sexual Information (RFSU) or the Swedish Federation for Gay and Lesbian Rights (RFSL).
You can also contact your industrial health service, if there is one at your place of work.
You can also get help from Nyföretagarcentrum and Almi företagspartner.
You can also hold a religious or other ceremony: a funeral within the Church of Sweden, a funeral according to the traditions of another religious community, a civil funeral or interment without a ceremony.
You can also purchase supplementary insurance that covers various types of damage to your own car and provides compensation if your car is stolen.
You can also read something about what is specifically Swedish – if there is such a thing.
You can also view art at other museums, galleries and exhibition rooms.
You can ask the municipality’s consumer advisory service or refugee co-ordinator what rules apply so as to make sure you do not pay too much.
You can ask your refugee co-ordinator to provide information on the CSN.
You can be absent from work due to illness for up to a week without consulting a physician.
You can be compensated both for bodily injury and for damage to clothing, glasses, and the like.
You can buy condoms at pharmacies and elsewhere, but birth-control pills, IUDs and diaphragms for women must be prescribed after an examination.
You can fill in a donor card, donationskort, indicating what your wishes are.
You can find landlords in the Yellow Pages of the telephone directory under the heading Bostadsföretag.
You can find more information on children and young people in the chapters on Child care and Schools and education.
You can find out about positions available, lediga platser through the Employment Office in various ways: on bulletin boards and in special publications available at the Employment Office itself, and at the Internet address http://www.ams.se.
You can find such companies in the Yellow Pages under the heading Rekryteringsföretag or Personaluthyrning.
You can find their addresses and telephone numbers at the end of this chapter.
You can find them in the Pink Pages of the telephone directory.
You can get an ID card through a post office or bank.
You can invite politicians who may be assisted by interpreters if necessary.
You can join a union even if there is not a local branch at your place of work.
You can lodge a complaint, reklamera, and return an item if it was defective from the start, like the shoes in the example above.
You can meet politicians at political meetings or at their party offices.
You can receive support not only for housing and personal expenses but also for other costs, such as medical care, dentistry and glasses.
You can then see whether you paid too much tax the year before and will get a refund or perhaps have to pay more.
You can travel abroad temporarily without putting your permit at risk, however.
You can usually borrow back issues of magazines.
You cannot always expect the Employment Office to find something for you, because it is not at all certain that they will.
You cannot specify who will move into your flat after you; that is up to the landlord.
You do not have to pay for the product if you send it back within two weeks, but you do have to pay transport costs.
You get no sick pay or sickness benefits if you are ill, you receive no compensation if you are injured on the job or lose your job, and you receive no pension for the period during which you were illegally employed.
You have basic eligibility if you graduated from upper-secondary school with adequate grades.
You have come to the first country in the world that banned corporal punishment of children.
You have the right to move freely through the countryside under certain conditions.
You may also be admitted to YTH if you do not have an upper-secondary education but do have six years of professional experience behind you.
You may also be eligible for legal aid if a dispute in which you are involved is tried in court.
You may also be eligible if you received an education abroad corresponding to Swedish upper-secondary school and have an adequate grasp of Swedish.
You may also exchange it for a Swedish driving licence without taking a test.
You may be able to solve some aspects of the problem through a joint conversation.
You may be granted legal aid to help defray such expenses; this is discussed later in this chapter.
You may be required to pay a fine and then pay the tax your employer has failed to pay.
You may, however, apply to university without having your educational background evaluated if you have your records translated into Swedish by an authorised translator.
You may need a visa, however, which is usually valid for three months.
You may only use your licence for one year after you are entered in the national population register, folkbokförd.
You may read your medical records if you wish and can receive a copy for a small fee.
You may receive study assistance for a maximum of 240 weeks, which corresponds to six years of full-time study.
You may remain anonymous if you like.
You may very well be able to find an association or club that matches your interests.
You must also approach the police to obtain authorisation, polistillstånd, for certain special activities.
You must also be approved by the tenant-owner association and make a down payment, insats*, to join the association.
You must be able to confirm your identity either by means of a passport issued in your native country or by some other identification document, bearing your photograph, issued by a competent, behörig* authority in your native country.
You must be careful when making fires, you may not chop down trees or otherwise harm the natural environment, and you may not enter the area round someone’s house or camp or stay in a caravan on someone else’s land for more than one night without asking the landowner for permission.
You must be paid extra for inconvenient working hours.
You must be registered with the Insurance Office to receive sickness benefits if you fall ill or parent’s allowance if you have a child.
You must complete a minimum number of course points every term to continue receiving assistance.
You must either receive extra payment for your overtime or be permitted to take time off corresponding to your overtime hours.
You must have managed your affairs properly in Sweden.
You must have the car inspected during the period specified in the letter, otherwise you may not continue driving it.
You must pay the rent for the following month no later than the last weekday of the current month.
You never hear the one that kills you.
You order products from a catalogue and pay when you pick up the package at the post office.
You pay a fee for the various things included in your home help service.
You should also bring along a friend or relative who already has an ID and can confirm that you are the person referred to by the documentation.
You should always tell the tax office staff why you need the certificate, since certificates are made out differently depending on the purpose they are to be used for.
You should take a hard look at everything that is required for the company to succeed.
You should therefore report your salary to the Social Insurance Office as soon as you start a job.
You should therefore speak to everyone you know – family, friends, neighbours and acquaintances.
”You silly old bushman, you need an umbrella!” she shouted.
You then receive sick pay, sjuklön, from your employer for two weeks.
You usually only receive one reminder about an unpaid invoice.
You will bang your head against the wall.
You will be billed after you are discharged from the hospital.
You will be given a referral, remiss, a certificate indicating that you need a hospital appointment.
You will not have to pay rent, but every month you pay a fee, avgift, to the association.
You will stumble across a thousand invisible boundaries and be surprised when acquaintances and coworkers get angry.
You will then be added to his or her patient rolls.
You will then receive unique personal identification number.
Young children in Sweden are offered pre-school activities.
Young people can get help with contraception at youth counselling centres.
Your child will be examined by a physician several times during his or her first nine years at school.
Your employer may be sentenced to a fine or prison and may also have to pay a penalty fee.
Your healthcare or maternity care centre can provide more information on how it is done.
75 Your initial period in Sweden A fresh start in a new country
Your job will not end until you want to quit or you receive notice.
124 Your new neighbours An umbrella
240 Your new neighbours Shame and shared humanity
Your taxes fund a parent’s allowance that allows parents to stay at home with their children for a certain period.
YTH is for people with an upper-secondary education or the equivalent who have worked for at least four years in a given profession.
